```plaintext
1975

Vivarium: an interface and engine for integrative multiscale modeling

the bigraph. This contrasts with the standard ‘flat’ network that has 
all nodes at a single level, and with fixed connectivity. A compart-
ment is a store node with internal nodes, which can include its own 
internal processes and the standard variable-containing stores 
(Fig. 1d). A hierarchy is a place graph, and a hierarchy structure, with 
hierarchies nesting recursive relations between compartments 
(Fig. 1e). Boundary stores connect processes across compartments in 
a hierarchy—these compartments themselves imply biological 
models that can be embedded in a hierarchy. Just as with biological 
systems, compartments are the key to a modelled complexity—they 
organize systems into hierarchies of compartments within compart-
ments, with modules that can be reconfigured and recombined.

In practical terms, this means that Vivarium facilitates collabora-
tive model development by simplifying the incorporation of alter-
nate sub-models. This allows users to (i) write their own processes, 
composites and update methods, (ii) import libraries with processes 
developed for different projects, (iii) reconfigure and recombine 
existing processes and (iv) make incremental changes (add, remove, 
swap, reconfigure) iterate on model designs that build upon pre-
vious work. Auxiliary processes are provided to offload complexity 
from the main processes.

The Vivarium engine is provided with the processes and a top-
ology, it constructs the stores based on the processes’ declared sche-
mas for each, and executes the processes in the order specified in the 
hierarchy, and executes their interactions in time (Fig. 2a). Vivarium 
is able to support large models with thousands of states and numer-
ical equations. To accommodate these demands, Vivarium dis-
tribute processes onto different OS processes (not to be confused 
with a Vivarium process) (Fig. 2b). Communication between pro-
cesses on separate OS processes is mediated by message passing with 
Python’s multiprocessing library. Simulations have run on Google 
Compute Engine with hundreds of CPUs (Sukanl, et al., 
2021)—which scale the computation without any additional run-
time configuration. The Vivarium engine can dynamically reassign 
processes to be run sequentially.

The engine is a discrete-event simulator—it advances the simula-
tion forward by iterating the global time, triggering each process to 
iterate at its respective time step, retrieving updates at the end of 
the time step, and passing these updates to the connected stores 
(Fig. 2c). Processes can declare their own required time step, and 
can update their states during runtime to support adaptive time 
steps. The structure of a hierarchy is also dynamic and allows for 
stores, processes and entire compartments to be created, destroyed 
or moved during runtime. This allows for modeling important 
biological mechanisms, such as cell forming, destroying, merging, 
division, engulfing and expelling of subcompartments (Fig. 2d).

3 Multipartagrand composites

In this section, we demonstrate the power of Vivarium by apply-
ing it to complex, real-world examples. Specifically, we use Vivarium 
to integrate several modeling paradigms, building wrapper proc-
esses around existing libraries and wiring them together in a 
composite simulation. COBRA is used for flux-balance analysis 
(Ebrahim et al., 2013), Bioscrape is used to simulate chemical reac-
tion networks (Swaminathan et al., 2017), and multibody is used as a 
solid-body physics engine for spatial multicell physics (Blowgmi, 
2019). The implementation of each of these separate processes is 
briefly described here, and in greater detail in Supplementary 
Materials; however, our primary aim in this section is to highlight 
the integrated, multipartagrand model of an Escherichia coli colony 
with many individual cells in a spatial environment, that collectively 
try to undergo a lactose shift in response to glucose depletion. For 
interested readers, we recommend the Supplementary python note-
books, which show the incremental development steps, describe 
strategies for their integration, and display the resulting emergent 
behavior.

When grown in media containing the two sugars glucose and lac-
tose, a colony of E.coli will first consume only the glucose until it is 
depleted; the colony will then enter a lag phase of reduced growth, 
which is followed by a second phase of growth from lactose uptake.

During the glucose growth phase, the expression of the lac operon is 
inhibited while glucose transporters GalP and PTS are expressed. 
When external glucose is depleted, cells at first do not have 
the capacity to import lactose. The lac operon controls the genes lacZ 
(lactose lyase) whose activity allows lactose to enter the cell, lacZ 
(β-Galactosidase) which degrades the lactose, and lacA (Galactoside 
acetyltransferase) which enables downstream lactose metabolism. 
Once the operon is activated and proteins are expressed, the metabol-
olism shifts to lactose and growth resumes. See Santillan and 
Mackey (2008) for a more comprehensive overview. For this ex-
ample, a flux-balance model of E.coli is used to model overall cellu-
lar metabolism, while the details of the glucose-lactose regulatory, 
transport and metabolic circuit are represented by a chemical reac-
tion network.

3.1 Individual paradigms

The individual processes were built with wrappers around existing 
modeling libraries, which were imported from this article’s project 
repository and were in a large integrative model. These are 
separately available for re-use in the libraries vivarium-core, vivar-
ium-bioscrape and vivarium-multibody. Supplementary Material 
provides additional details on each of the processes, and shows each 
being run on its own.

Flux-balance analysis with COBRA. Flux balance analysis (FBA) 
is an optimization-based modeling approach that takes a 
network of stoichiometric biochemical systems, represented as a 
matrix of stoichiometric coefficients and a set of flux constraints, 
and applies linear programming to determine flux distributions 
(Orth et al., 2010). FBA is made dynamic (called dFBA) by iterat-
ively re-optimizing the objective with updated constraints at every time 
step (Varma and Palsson, 1994); these constraints can include 
environmental nutrient availability, gene regulation or enzyme kinet-
ics. We developed a Vivarium process that provides a wrapper 
around COBRA (Ebrahim et al., 2013), which allows any 
constraint-based model to be used in a Vivarium composite. We 
used a published E.coli model that includes 2382 reactions and 
includes the activity of 7 molecules (Feist et al., 2010).

Chemical reaction networks with Bioscrape. To add a chemical 
reaction network (CRN) model of transcription, translation, regula-
tion and the enzymatic activity of the lac operon and its resulting 
proteins, we turned to a published model (Santillan and 
Mackey, 2008) that describes the lac operon control. We converted 
the model to an SBML format using BioCRNpyler—an open source tool 
for specifying CRNs (Poole et al., 2020). With the model in SBML, 
we ran simulations with a Vivarium process built with Bioscrape 
(Swaminathan et al., 2017)—a framework that supports deter-
ministic and stochastic simulations.

Multicell physics with Multicell. The environment is implemented 
using a custom called lattice. The environment is a multi-body 
library that includes multibody and diffusion processes. Multibody is 
a wrapper around the physics engine pymunk (Blowgmi, 2019), 
which models individual agents as capsule-shaped rigid bodies that 
can move, grow and collide. Multibody tracks boundary variables 
for each agent: location, length, width, angle, mass, thrust and tor-
que. It applies these to the physics engine, runs it and returns a new 
location for each agent. Agents can update their volume, mass and 
thrust vectors. Upon division, a custom thrust profile is used to 
generate location of agents, so that daughters are placed end-
to-end in the same orientation as the mother. Diffusion simulates 
the continuous-dimensional fields of molecular concentrations. Each 
lattice location holds the local concentrations of any number of mol-
ecules, and diffusion solves how they homogenize across local 
sites. Agents can update and access molecule at their position in 
the field using the same process ‘local field’.

Adaptor processes. Each process described above focuses on a 
different aspect of cellular behavior, applies a differ-
ent mathematical representation, and formats its data by different 
standards. Integrating them requires data conversions and complex 
mapping of assumptions about their shared variables. This is 
achieved with a set of adaptor processes which convert between the 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article/38/17/1972/6621200 by guest on 09 July 2025
```