```plaintext
Bioinformatics, 38(7), 2022, 1972–1979
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btac049
Advance Access Publication Date: 4 February 2022
Original Paper

Systems biology

Vivarium: an interface and engine for integrative multiscale modeling in computational biology

Eran Agmon 1,*, Ryan K. Spangler 1, Christopher J. Skalnik 1, William Poole 2, 
Shayn M. Peirce 3, Jerry H. Morrison 1 and Markus W. Covert 1,*

1Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA, 2Computation and Neural Systems, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA and 3Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22903, 
USA

*To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Associate Editor: Alfonso Valencia

Received on May 1, 2021; revised on December 14, 2021; editorial decision on January 22, 2022; accepted on January 28, 2022

Abstract
Motivation: This article introduces Vivarium—software born of the idea that it should be as easy as possible for 
computational biologists to define any imaginable mechanistic model, combine it with existing models and execute 
them together as an integrated multiscale model. Integrative multiscale modeling confronts the complexity of biol-
ogy by combining heterogeneous datasets and diverse modeling strategies into unified representations. These inte-
grated models are then run to simulate how the hypothesized mechanisms operate as a whole. But building such 
models has been a labor-intensive process that requires many contributors, and they are still primarily developed 
on a case-by-case basis with each project starting anew. New software tools that streamline the integrative model-
ing effort and facilitate collaboration are therefore essential for future computational biologists.
Results: Vivarium is a software tool for building integrative multiscale models. It provides an interface that makes in-
dividual models into modules that can be wired together in large composite models, parallelized across multiple 
CPUs and run with Vivarium’s discrete-event simulation engine. Vivarium’s utility is demonstrated by building compos-
ite models that combine several modeling frameworks: agent-based models, ordinary differential equations, sto-
chastic reaction systems, constraint-based models, solid-body physics and spatial diffusion. This demonstrates just 
the beginning of what is possible—Vivarium will be able to support future efforts that integrate many more types of 
models and at many more biological scales.
Availability and implementation: The specific models, simulation pipelines and notebooks developed for this article 
are all available at the vivarium-notebooks repository: https://github.com/vivarium-collective/vivarium-notebooks. 
Vivarium-core is available at https://github.com/vivarium-collective/vivarium-core, and has been released on Python 
Package Index. The Vivarium Collective (https://vivarium-collective.github.io) is a repository of freely available 
Vivarium processes and composites, including the processes used in Section 3. Supplementary Materials provide 
them with an extensive methodology section, with several code listings that demonstrate the basic interfaces.
Contact: agmon.eran@gmail.com or mcovert@stanford.edu
Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.

1 Introduction
Our understanding of biological phenomena stands to be dramatic-
ally improved if we can adequately represent the underlying systems, 
mechanisms and interactions that influence their behavior over time. 
Generating these representations, most commonly via mathematical 
and computational modeling, is made challenging by the complex 
nature of such systems. The most common modeling approaches 
today are statistical, extracting meaning from observational data by 
fitting functions such as regression, cluster analysis and neural 
networks (Yang et al., 2019). Although these models have been suc-
cessful at approximating correlations among observed variables, the 
structures of the models are not easily interpretable, making it diffi-
cult to determine biological mechanisms. In contrast, mechanistic 
models are designed to reproduce observed data by representing 
causality (Pahari, 2014). Thus, the mathematical form and parame-
ters of mechanistic models are testable hypotheses about the 
system’s underlying interactions. In other words, mechanistic 
models can provide unique insights that can gather more evidence 

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com

1972
```