```plaintext
Vivarium: an interface and engine for integrative multiscale modeling                                                                                     1977

process, and the COBRA process using them as flux constraints on 
the FBA problem. The Bioscape process calculates details for each 
reaction’s substrates and products with its stochastic kinetic simula- 
tor. These details are then used by the flux adaptor to calculate a 
time-averaged flux, which it passes to the flux bounds store. The 
COBRA process uses these values to constrain the FBA problem’s 
flux bounds, which impacts the resulting calculated flux distribution 
and the overall growth rate. The Bioscaper and COBRA processes 
are also coupled through the transporter proteins, as well as internal 
metabolite pools that are built up by metabolism. Changes in the in- 
ternal metabolite pools trigger the expression of genes (lac genes in 
this example), which in turn influence the kinetic transport rates. 
Thus, a causal loop is implemented between the Bioscaper and 
COBRA processes. 

The stochastic versus deterministic version of the composite rep- 
quire different adaptor processes for converting between counts and 
concentrations—for example, a ‘field counts step’ process was 
required for the stochastic Bioscaper process to read external counts 
of glucose and lactase in a cell’s local environment based on the lat- 
tice resolution. The deterministic model run must handle and for a 
larger overall environment volume—as the volume of the lattice 
increases, this translates to many counts of glucose and lactase that 
the stochastic model has to simulate with the Gillespie algorithm, 
which is a time-intensive method. Thus, on its own, the stochastic 
model is limited to very small environments and rapid life 
cycles in its current form. This challenge was overcome by partitioning the 
environment with the spatial processes described below. Future 
work could improve performance by passing reactions with small 
molecule counts to a stochastic simulator, and reactions with large 
counts to a deterministic simulator. 

To model cell division, ‘division’ and ‘divide’ conditions were 
used. The division step reads individual cell mass, and triggers divi- 
sion when that agent reaches 200fg. The mass step process then re- 
calculates the agent’s mass by adding the mass of the products (the 
COBRA process), and calculates the total cell mass. The volume of 
the process then calculates volume step approaches the size of the cell from 
its mass, including volume, length and width. These are the three 
spatial environment. The divide condition process connects to the 
mass variable directly, and waits for the division threshold to be 
value. When this threshold is passed, division for emerges when the 
update to terminate the mother agent and generate two daughters. 

The environment consists of 2D array of concentration values 
for glucose and lactase, which set the local external environments 
for individual cell agents. The local field process converts concen- 
trations specified between exchanges into concentrations feeding 
spatial fields. The diffusion process restores the resulting fields, 
models diffusion between them, and updates the local external vari- 
ables for each agent, so that agents only experience the concentra- 
tions at their given location. When agents reach the mass 
requirement for division they divide, after which their daughter cells 
are placed end-to-end, and their growth pushes upon neighbors with 
the multicody process. Thus, cell growth and division lead to the 
emergence of a colony with many individuals (Fig. 3b). 

The full model was used to simulate a glucose-lactose diauxic 
shift (Fig. 3c–e). This simulation is configured with a low initial glu- 
cose concentration, so that the onset of lactose metabolism can be 
triggered within a few hours of simulation time. As the initial cell 
grows from a single agent through multiple generations (Fig. 3b), it 
initially takes up glucose and not lactose (Fig. 3c and d). The glucose 
concentration occupied by cells is locally depleted, but replenished by 
diffusion from neighboring locations (Fig. 3c, top). The simulation 
ration to the environment leads to cells experiencing different local 
concentrations of glucose and lactose. In response, some lac operon 
RNA is expressed due to stochasticity as well as in response to the 
local environment (Fig. 3d). Expression of the lac genes allows lac- 
tose to be taken into the cells (Fig. 3c, bottom), but with different 
levels of the lac proteins, leading to heterogenous uptake rates for 
glucose and lactose as well as the growth rate (Fig. 3e). By the end 
of the simulation, there is still slight glucose uptake; the colony is 
growing very slowly and is still shifting between growth phases, but 
lactose-driven growth has become the main driver of colony growth. 

4 Discussion

This article introduces Vivarium—a software tool for integrative 
multiscale modeling designed to simplify how new models are 
build upon and integrate existing models. We demonstrated the inte- 
gration of several diverse frameworks including deterministic and 
stochastic models, constraint-based models, hierarchical embedding, 
division, solid-body physics and diffusion. Each model was 
developed and tested independently, and was then wired into a 
larger composite model that integrates diverse mechanistic rep- 
resentations. While modular software exists that enables simulation 
of cellular biophysics and colony growth, such as CellModeller 
(Rudge et al., 2012) or Smoldyn (Naylor et al., 2017), or else 
allows for the assembly and integration of models-based ODEs rep- 
resented in SBML, such as Tellurium (Choi et al., 2018), Vivarium 
was designed with the requirements of whole-cell modeling in mind 
and as such is a far more general model integration tool. By enabling 
interfaces between a wide range of different models and supporting 
their interaction in a unified simulation, we believe that Vivarium 
will be broadly useful for diverse integrative models and a host of 
applications. 

Users of many new model integration software should expect sup- 
port for simulations of any size and complexity, as well as for archi- 
tecture and simulations for different biological processes. Moreover, 
these simulations need to be accessible to as many scientists as pos- 
sible. To meet these expectations, Vivarium was built to support 
three types of scalability: (i) scalable representation, (ii) scalable 
computation and (iii) scalable development. Our discussion focuses 
on Vivarium’s strengths and limitations with regards to all three 
types of scalability, so that future iterations of model integration 
software can improve on them. 

Scalable representation. A Vivarium model can be built with 
nested hierarchies that represent cells and mechanism at multiple 
spatial and temporal scales. This multiscale representation en- 
ables hybrid models that mix different types of models—such as 
ODEs and stochastic models—by using different representations for 
different scales. For example, a deterministic model can be used to 
describe flux models at the level of metabolic networks, while a 
solid-body physics simulator will many individual cells. Hierarchies 
are a technique enabling run time to simulate behaviors such as 
bonding, merging, and engulfing—this enables the structure of 
the model to change, grow and scale as new processes are 
launched and the total simulation evolves. 

While model-based, deterministic, and stochastic optimization- 
based models were demonstrated here, they represent only a single 
demonstration of the scalability of this framework. As another ex- 
ample, we recently applied Vivarium to simulate a full-scale model of 
E. coli chemotaxis (Aponte and Spangler, 2020), and also used it 
to create the first ‘whole-colony’ simulation of cellular growth on 
an agar plate (Skalnik et al., 2021). In these multicellular simulations, 
every individual cell is an instance taken from the current version of 
the whole-cell model (Macklin et al., 2020), and Vivarium 
integrates the behavior of these large-scale models as agents 
interacting across a lattice shared growth environment. 

At present, there are no Vivarium processes to represent model 
uncertainty, which arises when some aspects of the system are not 
known such as the underlying mechanism of initial state, as can 
occur in stochastic models. In principle, if even a single variable in 
any component model has uncertainty associated with it, that uncer- 
tainty spreads to all variables of the component models. Thus, in 
this will be essential to develop specialized Vivarium processes to han- 
dle uncertainty in the future. One example might be a type of step, 
which would read the system state, evaluate uncertainty and deter- 
mine how to proceed—for example by triggering ensembles of pro- 
cesses to randomly reach their resulting states, using those states to 
determine the full system update. 

Scalable computation. Vivarium’s engine supports distributed 
simulation, with each model process running in parallel on its own 
OS process, and communicating with the engine through messages. 
The engine distributes the processes across a computer architecture 
with many CPUs, and runs them in parallel at their preferred time 
scales. One current limitation is that most simulators were not 
designed to be called iteratively in rapid succession and have to be 
```