```plaintext
1974                                                                                                              E. Agmon et al.

(a) Process                      (c) Composite                               (a) 
                                                                                  state
                                                                                  update
parameters, 
update function

(b) Store                                                                  (c)
                                                                                  translation
                                                                                  time
state variables, 
schema
                                                                                  stochastic
                                                                                  transcription
                                                                                  time

(d) 

                                                                                  processes
                                                                                  processes
                                                                                  time
                                                                                  mass
                                                                                  shape
                                                                                  steps

(e) 

boundary

outer
inner

Compartment                     Hierarchy

Fig. 1. Vivarium's model interface, illustrating the formal structure of the frame-
work. (a) A Process, shown as a rectangular flowchart symbol, is a modular models
that contain the parameters, an update function and ports. (b) A Store, shown as the
flowchart symbol for a database, holds the state variables and schemas that deter-
mine how variables are used. (c) Composite are bundles of processes and stores
wired together by a bipartite network called a topology, which processes connect
to stores through their ports. (d) Compartments are nested structures connected
across a single level, which can be wired across compartments through composite
stores. (e) Compartments are embedded in a hierarchy—depicted as a hierarchical
network with lower layers. Outer compartments are shown above and inner com-
partments below

computational object that holds the system's state variables. A X.
Vivarium process is a computational object that contains the update
function f, which describes the inter-dependencies between the vari-
ables and how they map from one time (t) to the next (t + Δt).
Processes are configured by parameters r, which give the update
functions a distinct shape of mapping from input values to output
values.

A step is a type of process for models that are not time-step-
dependent (Fig. 2d). For example, after the counts of molecules are
updated by dynamic processes, it might be necessary to calculate the
resulting change in total cell mass. A mass step would read all the
updated molecular counts, and multiply by molecular weight to re-
calculate cell mass. A second step could then read cell mass, and use
it to update other values such as cell volume, length and width based
on a mathematical model of cell shape. Steps run in a fixed order
after the dynamic processes have finished. This allows users to im-
plement a type of dependency graph—for example the mass step
runs before the cell shape step. Steps have been used to translate
states between different modeling formats, implement fit or restric-
tion operations to translate states between scales, and calculate
processes that offload complexity. In principle, steps could also be
used for statistical models that sample from an underlying distribu-
tion, or structural models that apply various constraints to deter-
mine spatial positioning of 3D shapes, such as atoms or molecules
into provided volumes (Johnson et al., 2015; Ward et al., 2013).
Processes include ports, which allow users to wire processes to-
gether through variables in shared stores. Variables in a store each

have a schema, which declare the data type and methods by which
updates to the variable are handled—this includes methods such as
updater, for applying update functions, and divider for gener-
ating daughter states from a mother state. A topology (short for
‘process-store interaction topology’) is a bipartite network that
declares the connections between processes and stores. Each store
is connected to a composite model with multiple, coupled pro-
cesses. Ideal processes do not have hidden private states, and expose
their states by exchanging them with stores. Some processes have
states are unobservable, and would actually be used to improve perfor-
mance since they do not have to synchronize. Externalize state
variables in stores allow other processes to write to the same varia-
bles, which solves those processes’ needs for read and update
these same variables as the simulations run forward in time.

Processes can be connected across a hierarchical representation
of nested compartments. Vivarium uses a bipartite formalism
(Milner, 2009)—a network with embeddable nodes that can be
placed within other nodes, and which can be dynamically restruc-
tured. Through their topologies, processes act as the hyperlinks of

Fig. 2. The vivarium engine takes the system and runs it forward in time. (a) A basic
simulation loop has processes view the states through their ports, run their update
function for a given time step, and return an update. (b) Steps can run in par-
allel on OS processes, which is placed on a long-running CPU thread, with state
views and updates handled by message-passing. This allows for scaling across
computers with many CPUs. (c) Processes can run at different time scales, and
using variable time steps. Here, a translation process has its own operating fast
time steps, and stochastic transcription is operating a variable time step deter-
mined based on the state of the system at each time step’s start. (d) Steps are a sub-
class of Process, used for models that are not time-step-dependent. Steps run in a
fixed order, at the end of the simulation. (e) A directed acyclic graph (DAG)
with a cell’s steps. Each specialized daughter state has the states updated by the
dynamic processes. In this figure a dynamic process runs for A, followed by a mass
step and a shape step. (e) A series of hierarchical compartments are simulated
by a divide step, which can be implemented with a neighbor by an engulf up-
date, then the engulfed compartment is deleted with a burst update. Other hierarchy
updates include merge, add or delete
```