```
1976                                                                                                     E. Agmon et al.

expected units, reference frames, name spaces, data formats and
other representations. Adaptor processes required for integrating the
Bioscrape and COBRA processes with the lattice composite include
processes ‘local field’, ‘mass step’, ‘volume step’ and ‘flux adaptor’
(described below).

3.2 Model integration and simulation results
The final composite model topology is shown in Figure 3a. The
COBRA process’s metabolism and Bioscrape process’s gene expres-
sion and transport are coupled through a ‘flux bounds’ store, with
the Bioscrape process setting uptake rates with the flux adaptor

(a)

[Diagram showing hierarchy and topology of the full composite model]

(b)

1 agent          12 agents          25 agents          43 agents

(c)

[Graphs showing external glucose concentrations (mmol)]

(d)

[Graphs showing lac operon mRNA (counts), β-galactosidase (counts), and total colony mass (fg)]

(e)

lactose permease (counts)          glucose flux (mmol/L/s)          lactose flux (mmol/L/s)          growth rate (fg/s)

[Graphs showing various cell states]

Fig. 3. The full, integrated, stochastic version of the model in the Lattice environment. (a) Hierarchy and topology of the full composite model. The processes and stores are col-
ored by paradigm, with orange nodes associated with COBRA, green nodes associated with Bioscrape, light blue with division, dark blue with multicell physics and chemical
diffusion in the environment, and brown nodes associated with the boundary between cell and environment. Main processes are highlighted with a thicker outline. (b)
Snapshots of the colony throughout a simulation. Cells colored according to phylogeny with similar colors indicating more closely related cells. (c) The external lactose and
glucose concentration fields over the course of the simulation. (d) Multigenerational timeseries, with variables from all cells shown over time. These colors correspond to the
phylogeny colors of (b). (e) Snapshots of the final simulation state (12.0 h), with various cell states tagged
```