```
ARTICLES

(IFN-γ) production after in vitro re-stimulation with OVA protein.
This response was obtained in WT and was intact in all Tlr4–/– mice
except for Trif–/– mice (Fig. 2a). We confirmed this observation for
distinct apoptosis inducers and tumor antigens. Mouse CT26 (H-2d;
colon cancer) or MCA205 (H-2b; sarcoma) cells treated with
doxorubicin efficiently primed tumor-specific T lymphocytes in
BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice with, respectively, a WT or a Tlr2–/–
genetic background (Fig. 2b). However, neither tumor cell type
elicited efficient T-cell priming in Tlr4–/– littermates (Fig. 2b).
Cross-presentation of OVA from dying EG7 (H-2b) cells was also
compromised by the knockout of Tlr4 in hosts carrying a different

MHC class I allele (H-2d) (Fig. 2c). Similar results were obtained in
C3H/HeJ mice (H-2k), which are defective in TLR4 signaling (data not
shown). In contrast, Tlr4–/– and C3H/HeJ mice mounted an intact
response to soluble OVA protein mixed with TLR9 agonists (CpG
oligodeoxynucleotides) (Fig. 2c and data not shown). Thus, the
absence of TLR4 selectively compromised the immune response
against dying cells, not soluble antigen.
T-cell priming by dying tumor cells depended stringently on DCs.
Injection of diphtheria toxin into mice expressing a transgenic
diphtheria toxin receptor (DTR) in DCs11 led to DC depletion and
abrogated the priming of T lymphocytes elicited by dying tumor cells

[Image: Graphs and charts illustrating experimental data]

Figure 2 TLR4 expression by DCs is required for the
immune response against dying tumor cells in vivo.
(a) Failure of dying tumor cells to elicit an OVA-specific
immune response in Tlr4–/– mice. Live or oxaliplatin-
treated EG7 cells were injected into the footpad of
C57BL/6 mice (WT or Tlr4–/–). Five days later, popliteal
lymph node cells were recovered and re-stimulated with
the OVA holoprotein for 72 h before quantification of
IFN-γ secretion. (b) Failure of dying tumor cells to elicit
a tumor-specific immune response in Tlr4–/– mice. Live or
doxorubicin-treated CT26 cells or MCA205
(right) were injected into the footpad of BALB/c or C57BL/6 mice (WT or Tlr4–/–), respectively. Lymph node cells were analyzed 5 d later for their capacity to
produce IFN-γ upon in vitro re-stimulation with tumor lysate. (c) Cross-presentation of antigen from dying tumor cells is impaired in Tlr4–/– hosts. Live or
irradiated EG7 cells (syngeneic to C57BL/6 mice) were inoculated into the footpad of WT or Tlr4–/– BALB/c mice, and the local immune response was
measured either as IFN-γ secretion (as in a) or as proliferation. As a positive control of antigen presentation, mice were injected with 1 mg of OVA
protein plus 10 μg CpG 28 as an adjuvant. The inset illustrates that IFN-γ elicited by cross-presentation is produced by both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.
(d) Requirement for DCs to mount an immune response against dying tumor cells. Irradiated EG7 cells were injected into C57BL/6 mice expressing a
transgenic DTR under the control of the CD11c promoter, and the mice were simultaneously injected i.p. with PBS or diphtheria toxin (DT). The local
immune response was assessed 5 d later as in a. (e) TLR4 is required for the immune response prompted by local tumor radiotherapy in vivo. EG7 tumors
established in the thigh were X-ray irradiated (10 Gy), and inguinal lymph node cells were analyzed 5 d later for their capacity to produce IFN-γ upon in vitro
re-stimulation. Results (means of triplicates ± s.e.m. n = 3) are representative of a typical experiment out of three independent ones. *P < 0.01.

1052 VOLUME 13 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2007 NATURE MEDICINE
```