```plaintext
508                                                                                   Michael R. Betts and Richard A. Koup

C. Background Expression of CD107a and b

Background expression of CD107a and b on the surface of T cells is typically very 
low in peripheral blood, although they can be detected on the cell surface of mitogen- 
activated T cells (Kannan et al., 1996). It should be noted, however, that these 
proteins are not expressed only in T lymphocytes. These proteins are normal residents 
of endosomal and lysosomal membranes and are detectable at a relatively high copy 
number in all cell types in humans, mice, rats, and chickens (Fukuda, 1991). Some 
peripheral blood cells, including activated platelets and monocytes, express these 
molecules on the cell surface to a higher degree than other cell types (Eskelinen et al., 
2003; Silverstein and Febbraio, 1992). Additionally, because all cell types express 
these proteins, cells with a permeable membrane such as dead or dying cells will stain 
positive for CD107a and/or b. Thus, it is extremely important for the cells to be tested 
to have high viability to help reduce background concerns. An additional concern 
regarding background arises as a result of the CD107a and b staining procedures. By 
including the antibodies to these proteins during the stimulation period, antigen- 
presenting cells present within the cells being examined, specifically B cells and 
monocytes, readily uptake the antibody for processing. Because monensin is present, 
these cells are unable to proteolytically process the antibody/fluorochromes and, 
therefore, also stain positive for CD107a and b. This effect can be readily seen in 
the example shown in Fig. 6 (upper left panel). Monocytes and B cells, labeled here 
with CD14 or CD19, are all CD107a/b^dull. By gating on small lymphocytes (Fig. 6, 
upper right panel), the majority of the CD107a/b^dull cells are removed. By removing 
the remaining CD14/19-positive events within the small lymphocyte gate (Fig. 6, 
bottom panels), a substantial proportion of the remaining CD107a/b background 
staining is eliminated, leaving the antigen-specific T-cell–expressed CD107a and b 
intact for further analysis. Thus, whenever possible, inclusion of a dump channel, 
specifically to label monocytes, B cells, and dead cells (if possible), can significantly 
reduce the CD107a and b background. Despite these measures, occasional patient 
samples will have higher CD107 background than others, with expression levels 
varying from 0.01% to more than 0.5% of CD8^+ T cells. Once the background has 
been reduced by the means presented here, the remaining background likely 
represents either nonspecific or an unknown antigen-specific degranulation by 
the CD8^+ T cells. Typically, however, the expression levels tend to be quite 
dull. In these cases, it may be pertinent to use a stricter gating method only on 
CD107a/b^bright events.

V. Applications

The general applications for this technique revolve primarily around the exami- 
nation of antigen-specific T lymphocyte function in humans and mice. This is the 
first flow cytometry–based assay that directly assesses the ability of T lymphocytes 
to degranulate. At the most basic level, the functionality of the ex vivo CD8^+ 
T-cell response to specific individual peptides of viral origin can be examined in a 
```