```plaintext
504                                                                 Michael R. Betts and Richard A. Koup

CMV                             HIV                             EBV

IFNγ

CD107a/b

Fig. 3  Representative examples of antigen-specific expression of CD107a/b on CD8⁺ T cells after 
activation with viral peptides. PBMCs from three patients were stimulated with peptides derived from 
cytomegalovirus (left), human immunodeficiency virus (middle), or Epstein–Barr virus (right). After 
incubation, cells were analyzed as described in Fig. 2. Note the presence of CD107a/b-positive IFN-
positive cells in each panel, as well as the different types and level of the responses observed.

10. Wash cells with wash buffer, 5 minutes at 1800 rpm; re-suspend pellet in 1% 
PFA.

11. Analyze by flow cytometry. Three examples of antigen-specific responses 
wherein the responding CD8⁺ T cells both degranulate and produce cytokine upon 
activation with viral peptides derived from human cytomegalovirus (CMV), human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), or Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) are shown in Fig. 3.

III. Results

An example of the gating strategy to analyze CD107a/b expression in activated 
CD8⁺ T cells is shown in Fig. 2. Cells were stimulated with SEB, as described in 
section II, and collected on a FACSCalibur flow cytometer, using FITC, PE, 
PerCP, and APC as the fluorescent parameters. The initial gate is on small resting 
lymphocytes (Fig. 2A), with care taken to avoid events with low side scatter and low 
forward scatter, as well as events with high side scatter (granulocytes/macro-
phages). This is particularly important for reducing background staining. Next, 
CD3⁺ events are gated upon (Fig. 2B). At this stage, one must account for any 
downregulation of CD3 that may have occurred in the activated T cells, if the CD3 
stain was performed on the cell surface rather than intracellularly. If downregula-
tion has occurred and is not accounted for, a significant proportion of the respond-
ing cells may be inadvertently gated out. In the example shown, the CD3 stain was 
performed on permeabilized cells, thus little downregulation of CD3 from the 
surface of the activated cells is observed. Also notice in this panel that the T cells 
expressing CD107a/b are very bright, as compared to the low-level expression 
observed in the CD3-negative cells. After the CD3⁺ T-cell gate, the cells are now 
separated into CD8⁺ and CD8⁻ events (Fig. 2C). As was the case for the previous
```