```plaintext
500                                                                                      Michael R. Betts and Richard A. Koup

Importantly, these proteins are rarely found on the surface of resting 
T lymphocytes (Betts et al., 2003; Fukuda, 1991; Peters et al., 1991). Thus, labeling 
responding cells with antibodies to CD107a and b and measuring their expression 
by flow cytometry can directly identify degranulating CD8+ T cells.

II. Materials and Methods

The measurement of CD107 expression on the cell surface of activated T cells 
can be used with numerous other measures of T lymphocyte function. We first 
present a general protocol for this technique and then present specific applications 
and pitfalls. The methods presented here all use human cells; however, these 
methods also apply to studies using murine cells, provided that the appropriate 
species-specific antibodies are used.

A. Materials

1. Cells to be analyzed: Fresh or frozen peripheral blood lymphocytes or T-cell 
clones can be used; viability is very important for background issues (see pitfalls), 
so samples with viability less than 85–90% will lead to spurious results.

2. Antibody to CD107a and/or CD107b: These antibodies are available from BD-
Pharmingen (San Diego, California) in directly conjugated forms; the only commer-
cially available direct conjugates include the following: for CD107a (clone H4A3), 
biotin, fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC), phycoerythrin (PE), and Cy5–PE; and 
for CD107b (cloneH4B4), FITC. The same antibodies are also available from 
Southern Biotech (Birmingham, Alabama) in purified form; these reagents must 
be titered (see later discussion) for use in the assay. Note that CD107a is the higher 
expressed of the two molecules (Betts et al., 2003) and, therefore, may itself be 
sufficient for degranulation analysis (Rubio et al., 2003). Additional formats of 
CD107a and b, including allophycocyanin (APC) and Alexa 680 conjugates, were 
made using standard conjugation techniques (Roederer, 2003).

3. Antibodies to CD28 and CD49d: Purified azide-free antibodies to these 
molecules are added to provide costimulation, as is commonly used in intracellular 
cytokine assays; these antibodies are available from BD Biosciences (San Diego, 
California) and are used at a concentration of 1 µg/ml of each antibody.

4. Fluorescently labeled antibodies to various cell-surface markers (CD3, 
CD4, CD8, CD14, CD19) and cytokines (interferon-γ [IFN-γ], tumor necrosis 
factor-α [TNF-α], etc.).

5. Appropriate antigen: When examining peptide-specific CD8+ T-cell re-
sponses, use cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) epitopes or peptide libraries at the 
desired peptide concentrations; Staphylococcus enterotoxin B (1 µg/ml final) serves 
as a positive control in all assays. Include unstimulated (or costimulation only) 
samples to control for background issues.
```