20. Detection of T-Cell Degranulation: CD107a and b

505

CD3 gate, care must again be taken to account for any cells that have down- 
regulated CD8 in the process of becoming activated. In this example, the CD8 stain 
was again performed on permeabilized cells. It can also be seen here that a small but 
detectable portion of CD3+/CD8− cells also becomes CD107a/b positive in re- 
sponse to SEB; these likely represent degranulating CD4+ T cells, and a similar 
type of analysis can be performed on this T-cell subset. Finally, if the cells were co- 
stained with a cytokine marker, such as IFN-γ, the relationship between cytokine 
production and degranulation can be directly observed by plotting IFN-γ versus 
CD107a/b expression in the CD8+ (Fig. 2D) or CD4+ T cells. As can be seen, 
although most SEB-responding CD8+ T cells become CD107a/b positive, the 
expression of IFN-γ can be quite variable and a substantial proportion of respond- 
ing cells do not produce IFN-γ. This serves in part to illustrate the diversity of 
the CD8+ T-cell response, because not all the responding cells exhibit the same 
functional profile.

Figure 3 shows three examples of responses obtained using specific peptides 
derived either from CMV, HIV, or EBV and illustrates some of the different 
response profiles that may be observed and the level of sensitivity that can be 
achieved when analyzing very small responses. In all three examples, human 
PBMCs were stimulated with antigenic peptides using the method described in 
section II. Figure 3 (left panel) shows the response to a CMV peptide in a CMV- 
positive individual. As can be seen, all the cells producing IFN-γ also become 
CD107a/b positive. The center panel shows the response to a mixture of over- 
lapping 15-mer peptides derived from HIV Pol in an HIV-positive individual. 
Unlike the CMV response in the left panel, a significant proportion of responding 
cells to the HIV peptides do not produce IFN-γ, and a varying degree of IFN-γ is 
observed in those cells that do produce this cytokine. Both the CMV- and the 
HIV-specific responses shown here are relatively large responses, on the order of 
2–7% of CD8+ T cells. In the right panel, however, a much smaller yet detectable 
response to an EBV-derived peptide is shown. Although this response is very low, 
approximately 0.2% of CD8+ T cells, it is still easily distinguishable as a predomi- 
nantly IFN-γ+ CD107a/b+ response.

IV. Critical Aspects

As with other techniques to measure T-cell function by flow cytometry, proper 
data analysis is a crucial aspect of this technique. Unlike standard intracellular 
cytokine assays, there are specific issues with examination of CD107a/b expression 
that must be considered during both the assay setup and the data analysis.

A. Trafficking of CD107a and b

CD107a and b in CD8+ T cells are localized to lysosomal, endosomal, and 
cytotoxic granular membranes (Peters et al., 1991). This localization occurs as a 
result of a sorting signal within the cytoplasmic tail of these proteins (Chang et al.,