```plaintext
ARTICLE

with no apparent stops. Therefore, resumed T cell motility in 
antigen-expressing tumors occurs preferentially in regions 
where the tumor cells are dead.

Modes of CTL migration in tumors
We next sought to characterize this resumed CTL migration 
in more detail. Resumed CTL motility in regions of the tu- 
mor where the tumor cells are dead followed an amoeboid 
pattern (Videos S6 and S7, available at http://www.jem.org/ 
cgi/content/full/jem.20061890/DC1). We observed impor- 
tant changes in the cell shape, suggesting a strong adaptation 
of the CTLs to the extracellular matrix and their ability to 
squeeze through narrow spaces as observed in artificial three- 
dimensional collagen matrix (32) or around stromal and tu- 
mor cells. CTLs occasionally followed collagen fibers, which 
were visualized by their SHG signals (Video S6). We also 
observed OT1 cells dividing inside the EG7 tumors (0.8% of 
the tracked OT1 cells, n = 1,249; Video S8). Because our 
videos last 30 min, the proportion of divisions over 24 h could 
be relatively high (up to 30–40% of the OT1 cells, as- 
suming the rate of divisions remains the same over this period 
of time). Divisions might have gone unnoticed in the EL4 
tumors because of the near 10-fold lower T cell population. 
Accumulation of tumor cells around blood vessels was ob- 
served occasionally (Video S9), suggesting either regions of 
preferential CTL extravasation or chemotaxis of CTLs for 
the blood vasculature. Three-dimensional reconstitution 
shows that CTLs are in close contact to blood vessels (Video 
S10). Strikingly, CTLs moved frequently along blood vessels 
(Video S7), adopting a more elongated morphology and un- 
dergoing less important changes in their shape.

To characterize and quantify the cells migrating along 
blood vessels in more detail, we took advantage of certain re- 
gions of the tumor periphery that displayed a highly orga- 
nized blood vessel pattern oriented along the major axis 
(Fig. 5 A). In these areas, numerous CTLs maintained close 
contact with vessels during migration (Video S11, available at 
http://www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/jem.20061890/DC1) 
for relatively long distances (114 ± 63 μm, n = 17). The 
CTLs adopted an anisotropic migration pattern along the 
axes of the blood vessels as indicated by a higher correlation 
coefficient (no-contact, r = 0.31 and contact, r = 0.73; 
P < 0.001) (Fig. 5 A, bottom). The ability of several cells 
to migrate from a blood vessel to another confirmed that 
the CTLs are probably not in the lumen of the vessels, but 
either in the tissue or within the “sheath” around the vessels. 
Migration along blood vessels proceeds with a mean velocity 
similar to that of the CTLs migrating at distance of visible 
blood vessels (8.2 ± 2.4 μm/min and 8.6 ± 2.8 μm/min, 
respectively; Fig. 5 B).

The shape of CTLs during migration along blood ves- 
sels seemed to differ from their morphology in other areas 
of the tumor (examples are shown in Fig. 5 C, top, and 
Video S12, available at http://www.jem.org/cgi/content/ 
full/jem.20061890/DC1). Fig. 5 D, top, shows the evolution 
of the elongation index (ratio between the length and the 

JEM VOL. 204, February 19, 2007 349

A

No OT1

Early

Late

EG-7

EL-4

B

GFP

PI

Merge

Early

Late

Figure 3. Tumor cell clearance during early and late phase.
(A) Representative TPLSM images (160 × 160 μm) of GFP-EG7 or GFP- 
EL4 tumors during early (day 3) and late (day 6) of tumor rejection 
after adoptive transfer of 10^7 OT1 cells. Vessels (red) are imaged by intra- 
venous injection of 70 kD rhodamine-dextran (2.5 μg/ml) and collagen 
fibers (blue) using SHG signals. Capture parameters were identical for 
all images. Bar, 44 μm. (B) TPLSM images (150 × 150 μm) of GFP-EG7 
(green) during early (day 4) and late (day 6) phase of rejection after intra- 
venous injection of propidium iodide (blue). Bar, 41 μm.

The relative proportions of each type of OT1 categories 
were quantified during the early phase (in regions of the tu- 
mors where tumor cells are alive) and during the late phase 
(in regions where most tumor cells are dead). As shown in 
Fig. 4 E, the proportion of OT1 cells in the first two cate- 
gories (Fig. 4 D, Stable and Confined) represents 55% in re- 
gions of the tumor where the tumor cells are alive. In contrast, 
in regions where most tumor cells are dead, categories 3 and 4 
(Fig. 4 D, Serial and Fleet) represent ~90% of the OT1 cells. 
Importantly, during the late phase, in regions of the tumor 
where part of the tumor cells were alive, OT1-CTL cells 
adopted an intermediate behavior, indicating again that re- 
sumed motility OT1-CTL cells was dictated by the viability 
of the tumor cells rather than by the adoptive transfer.

We conclude that during the early phase of tumor rejec- 
tion, OT1 cells are in contact with living tumor cells, either 
completely arrested or following very constrained trajec- 
tories, suggesting that they interact with several neighboring 
tumor cells. During the late phase of tumor rejection, in the 
regions where most tumor cells are dead, OT1 cells either 
make very short arrests or migrate rapidly within the tumor 
```