```
JEM

ARTICLE

In vivo imaging of cytotoxic T cell
infiltration and elimination of a solid tumor

Alexandre Boissonnas,1 Luc Fetler,2 Ingrid S. Zeelenberg,1
Stéphanie Hugues,1 and Sebastian Amigorena1

1Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U653, Immunité et Cancer, Pavillon Pasteur, Institut Curie,
F-75245 Paris Cedex 05, France
2Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR 168, Laboratoire de Physico-Chimie Curie, Institut Curie,
F-75245 Paris Cedex 05, France

Although the immune system evolved to fight infections, it may also attack and destroy
solid tumors. In most cases, tumor rejection is initiated by CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes
(CTLs), which infiltrate solid tumors, recognize tumor antigens, and kill tumor cells.
We use a combination of two-photon intravital microscopy and immunofluorescence
on ordered sequential sections to analyze the infiltration and destruction of solid tumors
by CTLs. We show that in the periphery of a thymoma growing subcutaneously, activated
CTLs migrate with high instantaneous velocities. The CTLs arrest in close contact to tumor
cells expressing their cognate antigen. In regions where most tumor cells are dead, CTLs
resume migration, sometimes following collagen fibers or blood vessels. CTLs migrating
along blood vessels preferentially adopt an elongated morphology. CTLs also infiltrate
tumors in depth, but only when the tumor cells express the cognate CTL antigen. In
tumors that do not express the cognate antigen, CTL infiltration is restricted to peri-
pheral regions, and lymphocytes neither stop moving nor kill tumor cells. Antigen
expression by tumor cells therefore determines both CTL motility within the tumor
and profound tumor infiltration.

CORRESPONDENCE
Sebastian Amigorena:
sebas@curie.fr

Abbreviations used: CFP,
cyan fluorescent protein; PI,
propidium iodide; SHG, second
harmonic generation; TPLSM,
two-photon laser-scanning
microscopy.

T cell–mediated immune responses require the
active migration of T cells in tissues and the es-
tablishment of specific cell–cell contacts with
other cell types. T cell migration was analyzed
intravitality in the last few years using noninva-
sive two-photon microscopy (1–3). In lymph
nodes, T lymphocytes move using an “ameboid”-
like migration mode and display extremely high
instantaneous velocities (up to 25 μm/min)
(4, 5) compared with DCs or tumor cells (6, 7).
The resulting high mean velocities allow naive
T cells to “scan” high numbers of DCs seeking
for their MHC–peptide ligands (8, 9). Once a
specific ligand was encountered, T cells stop
their migration and establish antigen-specific
contacts with DCs. The duration of these con-
tacts is determined by the maturation state of
the interacting DCs and the eventual presence
of regulatory T cells. In most experimental sys-
tems, long lasting (hours) contacts occurred
during the induction of effective priming (4, 5, 9),
whereas short interactions (minutes) were ob-

served in tolerogenic conditions (10, 11) or
in the presence of regulatory T cells (12, 13).
Shakhar et al. (14), however, only found modest
differences in the mobility of CD4+ T cells
during the induction of priming and tolerance.

During antiviral, antitumor, or autoimmune
responses, for example, differentiated effector
T cells migrate in nonlymphoid tissues to inter-
act with target cells. Similar to lymph nodes,
effector T cell migration in rat spinal cord
sections during experimental autoimmune en-
cephalomyelitis displays “ameboid” charac-
teristics and high mean velocities, showing
antigen-specific arrest upon autoantigen rec-
ognition within the spinal cord (15). Few stud-
ies also analyzed the effector phases of immune
responses by NK cells or NK cells (16, 17).
The killing of target cells by cytotoxic T lym-
phocytes was recently imaged in lymph nodes.
Regulatory T cells were thus shown to reduce
the killing efficiency of CTLs by interfering
with the polarized secretion of cytotoxic gran-
ules (18). The trafficking of CD8+ cytotoxic T
cells in tumor-bearing mice was analyzed recently
using magnetic resonance or positron-emission

A. Boissonnas and L. Fetler contributed equally to this work.
Online version of this article contains supplemental material.

JEM © The Rockefeller University Press $15.00
Vol. 204, No. 2, February 19, 2007 345-356 www.jem.org/cgi/doi/10.1084/jem.20061890

345
```