```
induce a change in the antigen-expressing tumors, which makes 
them permissive to infiltration by the activated T cells.

If tumor infiltration occurs through the periphery of the 
tumors, tumor cell killing by CTLs should also start in the 
periphery. To address this possibility, we performed ordered 
frozen sections as in Fig. 6 and labeled apoptotic cells using 
tunnel. Apoptotic cells were most abundant in the periphery of 
EG7 tumors at the end of the early phase (Fig. 7 A). The 
number of tunnel-positive cells was counted in sequential 
sections and plotted as a function of the distance from the 
surface of the tumor. As shown in Fig. 7 B, tunnel-positive 
cells accumulated in the periphery of the EG7 tumors. Reduced 
accumulation of apoptotic cells was detected in the EL4 tumors. 
The low numbers of tunnel-positive cells detected in the 
periphery of EL4 are most likely caused by the endogenous 
immune response. We conclude that apoptotic tumor cells 
accumulate in the periphery of the tumor, consistent with the 
peripheral infiltration of the CTLs evidenced in Fig. 6.

To extend our conclusions about the role of antigen in 
tumor infiltration to another tumor model, we used a fibro- 
sarcoma tumor cell line, MCA-101, expressing (MCA-OVA) 
or not expressing (MCA) recombinant OVA. OT1-GFP 
cells adoptively transferred to tumor-bearing mice induce the 
rejection of MCA-OVA, but not MCA-tumors, with a ki- 
netic similar to that of EG7 rejection (unpublished data). 
OT1 cells were detected in both tumors, although the re- 
cruitment to the OVA-expressing tumors was higher com- 
pared with the control MCA tumors (Fig. 8). Similar to the 
thymoma model, OT1-GFP cells infiltrated the periphery of 
MCA tumors independently of antigen expression (Fig. 6 B, 
bottom left). OVA expression, however, was required for 
tumor cell infiltration at days 5–6 (Fig. 6 B, bottom right). 
Similar to the thymoma model, a day 3–4 tunnel-positive 
apoptotic tumor cells accumulated in the tumor periphery of 
antigen-expressing tumors (Fig. 7 B). We conclude that deep 
tumor infiltration, but not peripheral infiltration, requires an- 
tigen expression by fibrosarcoma tumor cells.

DISCUSSION
We show here that antigen expression by thymoma cells 
plays a critical role in the motility of CTLs, in the extent of 
infiltration, and in the distribution of the infiltrating CTLs. 
As suggested previously (33, 34), our results indicate that in- 
filtration by lymphocytes proceeds from the periphery of the 
tumor. Our results also support a novel working model for 
the dynamics of tumor infiltration in depth: after diapedesis 
from blood vessels in periphery of the tumor, CTLs encoun- 
ter antigen-expressing tumor cells and arrest their migration 
for killing. Once tumor cells have been cleared in that re- 
gion of the tumor, CTLs resume motility sometimes guided 
along collagen fibers and blood vessels until they reach other 
regions with living tumor cells. Because the killing starts at 
the tumor periphery, adjacent regions where tumor cells are 
alive are always toward the center of the tumor. We speculate 
that when arriving in a new region of the tumor where the 
tumor cells are alive, CTLs arrest their migration again and 
kill the antigen-expressing tumor cells. The overall result would 
be a displacement of the CTL population toward deeper 
regions of the tumor. The repetition of this sequence of 
“motility” and “static/cytotoxic” phases would result in the 
progressive, oriented, antigen-dependent infiltration of the 
solid tumors that we have observed.

This model is mainly based on observations made on one 
single tumor—a mouse thymoma growing s.c. The topo- 
graphy of infiltration observed in this thymoma was confirmed 
in the more relevant chemically induced fibrosarcoma, MCA101. 
To date, the available imaging techniques impose the use 
of artificial experimental models, including the transfer of 
antigen-expressing tumors and the use of high numbers of 
transgenic T cells specific for transfected antigens. The analysis 
of mouse solid tumors more relevant to human cancers, spon- 
taneous and growing in other locations, and the use of CTLs 
recognizing “true” tumor antigens is required to confirm or 
invalidate our model of CTL invasion.

In any case, this working model is still preliminary. It is 
unclear from our results whether the critical factor for the 
observed arrest in CTL motility and the deep tumor infiltration 
is tumor cell killing or antigen recognition (and the resulting 
T cell activation). Experiments using control transgenic CTLs 
with unrelated antigen specificity or CTLs defective for dif- 
ferent functions (activation, cytokine secretion, cytotoxicity) 
should allow nailing down the precise requirements for CTL 

ARTICLE

A

MCA-OVA

MCA-OVA

MCA-OVA control

B

Thymoma

Fibrosarcoma

Tumor Signal (A.U.)

***

***

6000

4000

2000

0

0

100

200

300

Tumor depth (μm)

0

100

200

300

Tumor depth (μm)

Figure 7. Apoptotic cells after tumor T cell infiltration. Tunnel 
assay after adoptive transfer of OVA-specific OT1 cells in EG7 or MCA- 
OVA tumor-bearing mice. (A) Typical epifluorescence images (900 x 670 μm, 
right and left; 225 x 167 μm, middle) of MCA-OVA tumor sections 4 d 
after transfer or not of OT1 cells; cell nuclei were labeled with Dapi 
(blue) and apoptotic cells (green) were labeled by using the FITC-Tunnel 
detection kit. Bar, 204 μm. (B) Representative quantification of apoptosis 
in thymoma or fibrosarcoma (MCA-101) tumors expressing (closed symbols) 
or not (open symbols) the OVA epitope 4 d after OT1 cell transfer. 
n = 7 (not controls) (crosses) (mean ± SD, three to four different tumors). The 
statistical differences between peripheral and deep regions for EG7 and 
MCA-OVA are indicated. ***, P < 0.001.

353
```