```
arrest on tumor cells and for tumor infiltration in depth. Our
experiment using polyclonal GFP-expressing cells suggests
that T cells that do not induce rejection by themselves and do
not infiltrate tumors in depth alone may still infiltrate tumors
deeply in the course of rejection by other CTLs (Fig. S7).

It is therefore possible that T cell activation or cytokine
secretion within the tumor, rather than tumor cell killing, is
determinant for deep infiltration. Indeed, it has been proposed
that tumor infiltration by antigen-specific CTLs triggers the
invasion by other immune effectors, including neutrophils,
macrophages, and NK cells (26, 28, 29). It is therefore possible
that this “shell” of immune cells that modifies the tumor
microenvironment results in resumed CTL motility and deep
infiltration. Our working model could be developed to
include the progressive formation of this shell of immune
cells, which accompanies CTL infiltration and contributes to
sustained CTL motility and, thereby, to progression of the
CTLs deeper into the tumor.

It is therefore critical to understand the mechanisms un-
derlying the observed peripheral infiltration during the early
rejection phase. Although the density of blood vessels is not
higher in the tumor periphery (Fig. S6), we cannot exclude
that differences in the permeability of the vessels in different
regions of the tumor account for the observed CTL infiltra-
tion. It is likely, however, that the high permeability of
tumor vasculature results the facilitation of extravasation of
antigen-activated lymphocytes as soon as they enter the
tumor. The increased permeability observed in the tumor
periphery could also be a “feedback” favored by the local
inflammation, which is probably stronger in the periphery
of the tumor, caused by tumor cell killing by CTLs. These
peripheral CTLs would then proceed to infiltrate the tumor in
depth through the mechanism depicted above. It is also
possible, however, that as the CTLs, and most likely the
rest of the antitumor immune response, proceeds deeply into
the tumor, the permeability of the vessels is also progres-
sively increased.

Although it has been very difficult thus far, it should be
technically possible to analyze tumor cell killing in situ in real-
time. Indeed, our study has not addressed the frequency of the
killing events, the kinetics of tumor cell killing, or the number
of tumor cells killed by each CTL. Studies combining fluores-
cent tumor and stromal cells should also contribute to better
understanding the interactions between the tumor and its close
microenvironment. Future studies should also determine if the
spatial and temporal organization of the invasion of tumor
tissues by effector T cells, for example, in the course of auto-
immune disease or antimetastatic immune responses, follow
the same rules that govern the infiltration of solid tumors.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Mice. C57BL/6 mice were obtained from Charles River Laboratories.
C57BL/6 Rag2−/− TCR (Vβ8) transgenic mice (OT1) were crossed in
the Curie Institute animal facility with UBI-GFP/BL6 or with the Actβ-
EGFP/BL6 (35) to obtain the F1 progeny (OT1-GFP and OT1-CFP mice,
respectively). Live animal experiments were done in accordance to the
guidelines of the French Veterinary Department.

Cells. CD8+ OT1 cells (specific for the OVA257–264 peptide in a H2-Kb
MHC class I context) were obtained from LNs of OT1 mice (purity >90%),
and CD8+ OT1-GFP/CFP cells were purified (>90% purity) using Miltenyi
Biotec CD8+ magnetic cell sorting kit and injected retroorbitally in 6–8-wk-
old female C57BL/6 recipient tumor-bearing mice. EG7 and EL4 cell
lines were stably transfected with a GFP coding plasmid and selected by cell
sorting (97% GFP+ cells). The MCA101 (MCA) cell line was stably trans-
fected with an empty plasmid or a plasmid encoding for OVA coupled to the
CI62 domain of MFG-E8 to generate the control MCA and MCA-OVA,
respectively. Inoculated s.c. MCA-OVA is actively rejected after OT1 adopt-
ive transfer (unpublished data). Polyclonal cells were isolated from LNs of
UBI-GFP/BL6 mice and were stimulated overnight in flat wells coated with
1 μg/ml purified anti-CD3 and 1 μg/ml anti-CD28. All cell lines were cul-
tured in RPMI 1640+Glutamax I (GIBCO BRL) supplemented with addi-
tional antibiotics and 10% FCS. Tumor cells were injected s.c. in the flank
of mice (EL4 and EG7 in a contralateral manner), and tumor size was mea-
sured three times a week using the following formula:

\[
L \times l \times \left( \frac{L + l}{2} \right)
\]

Flow cytometry. Phenotypic characterization of OT1 T cells was performed us-
ing a FACSCalibur (Becton Dickinson). EG7 and EL4 tumors, lymph nodes,
and spleen were harvested at different days after adoptive transfer of OT1-
GFP naive cells. Cell suspensions were prepared in PBS 0.5% BSA, and cells
were labeled with anti-CD69-biotin followed by streptavidin–PercP–Cy5.5,
anti-CD62L–allophycocyanin, anti-CD44–PE, or anti-Vβ5–PE (Becton
Dickinson). For intracellular staining, cell suspensions were incu-
bated for 3 h at 37°C in the presence of 5 μg/ml Brefeldin A, fixed in 4%
PFA, and incubated in PBS 0.5% BSA with anti–IFN-γ–PE (Becton Dickin-
son). For CFSE labeling, cells were incubated for 10 min at 37°C with 5 μM
CFSE in PBS with 5% FCS (Invitrogen) during 10 min at 37°C. CFSE was
quenched with 5% FCS, and cells were washed with culture medium and
then centrifuged. Cells were diluted in PBS for injection.

Histological tumor analysis. The analysis of the distribution of OT1-
GFP cells, polyclonal GFP cells, and of CD31+ or tunnel-positive cells across
the tumors is illustrated in Fig. S5. Tumors were transversally and sagittally
sectioned in the middle, fixed, frozen in Tissue-Tek OCT compound, and
sectioned (5 μm) with a cryostat (Leica). For GFP quantification, 10 series
of 10 contiguous images from the periphery to the center of each tumor,
from 6 different sections, spaced from 10 to 20 μm (225 × 170μm) were
acquired in the first 1,800 μm for EG7 and 1,400 μm for MCA tumors. The
periphery of the tumor was delimited by light transmission imaging. The
density of OT1 cells across the tumor was calculated by normalizing the rela-
tive distribution of OT1 cells in each tumor to the mean of the global density
for all tumors. For tunnel experiments, tumor sections were labeled using an
in situ cell death detection kit (Roche) following manufacturer’s instructions.
Endothelial cells were stained using purified anti-CD31 (Becton Dickinson)
or isotype control and a secondary antibody coupled with cyanine-3. Tumor
sections were additionally stained with DAPI. Quantification was performed
by calculating the fluorescent area of tunnel- and CD31-positive cells. A
minimum of three different tumors were processed (analyzing one or two
different sections per tumor), as for the analysis of GFP-positive cells.

Two-photon laser scanning microscopy. 10^7 naive OT1-GFP cells
were retroorbitally injected to 6–8-wk-old female C57BL/6 recipients.
After 3 or 5–6 d after adoptive transfer, mice were anesthetized (initial dose
of 80 mg/kg ketamine, 4 mg/kg xylazine, and 0.3 mg/kg flunizanepar, fol-
lowed by a half-dose injection every 45 min; mice were kept under anesthesia
during 3 h), and the tumor region was surgically exposed for two-photon
imaging. Local temperature was monitored and maintained at 37°C. GFP/CFP-
labeled T cells could be detected up to 150 μm from the tumor’s surface.
Vessels were stained by i.v. injection of 200 μl of 2.5 μg/ml rhodamine-
Dextran 70 kD (Sigma-Aldrich). In vivo 3D imaging was performed by

354                                                                 IN VIVO CYTOTOXIC T CELL IMAGING IN TUMORS | Boissonnas et al.
```