The slight increase of OT1-GFP cell numbers in the spleen (0.20% ± 0.11 to 0.55% ± 0.1; P = 0.006) is probably caused by the recirculation of activated cells rather than a local antigen-induced expansion (30). Therefore, transferred OT1 cells are selectively activated in the antigen-expressing tumor draining lymph nodes.

The infiltration of the tumors by the OT1 cells was analyzed next by measuring the density of OT1-GFP cells in frozen sections of tumor after 3 days–4 after adoptive transfer. Both EG7 and EL4 tumors were infiltrated with OT1-GFP cells (Fig. 1 B), consistent with the observation that activated primary CD8+ T cells migrate to nonlymphoid tissue regardless of their site of activation (31). The number of OT1-GFP cells infiltrating EG7 was, as expected, higher than the number infiltrating EL4, especially at day 6 after adoptive transfer (327 ± 50 cells/mm2 versus 27 ± 2 cells/ mm2) (Fig. 1 B). The OT1-GFP cells infiltrating both EL4 and EG7 tumors expressed low levels of CD62L, attesting that both cell populations had been previously activated (Fig. 1 C). In contrast, only the OT1-GFP cells infiltrating OVA-expressing EG7 tumors, but not those infiltrating EL4 tumors, reexpressed high levels of the early activation marker CD69 (Fig. 1 C) and produced IFN-γ (Fig. 1 D). The EG7-infiltrating OT1-GFP cells, but not OT1-GFP cells infiltrating EL4, also down modulated their TCR, as attested by the use of tetramerized pMHC (Fig. S3 A, available at http:// www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/jem.20061890/DC1). We conclude that the parallel induction of antigen-expressing and antigen-nonexpressing tumors to the same mouse induced the infiltration of both tumors, although the T cells accumulated preferentially in the antigen-expressing tumors, T cell activation and effector function (CD69 expression, IFN-γ production, and killing), however, were only detectable in CTLs infiltrating the antigen-bearing tumors.

Antigen expression determines the motility of CTLs in tumors
To investigate the role of antigen recognition in the motility of antigen-specific CTLs within tumors, we next performed intravital time-lapse two-photon imaging. 8–10 d after s.c. injection of the tumors, OT1-GFP cells were adoptively transferred into tumor-bearing mice. At days 3–4 (early phase of rejection) or 5–6 (late phase of rejection) after adoptive transfer of OT1-GFP cells, the mice were anesthetized and injected i.v. with fluorescent dextran to visualize blood vessels. As shown in Videos S1 and S2 (available at http:// www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/jem.20061890/DC1), during the early phase of rejection OT1-GFP moved actively in EL4 tumors but had reduced motility in EG7 tumors. During the late phase of rejection, OT1-GFP cells moved actively in both tumors (Videos S3 and S4, available at http:// www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/jem.20061890/DC1). Individual cell trajectories were tracked (representative examples are shown in Fig. 2, A and B), and the mean velocity, arrest coefficient (the proportion of time every individual remains arrested), and confinement ratio (the ratio of the distance between the initial and the final positions of each cell to the total distance covered by that cell) were determined (Fig. 2 C).

During the early phase of rejection, OT1-GFP cells moved with a mean velocity of 4 ± 2 μm/min in the EG7 tumors compared with 10 ± 4 μm/min in the EL4 tumors. The migration trajectories were more restrained in the EG7 compared with the EL4 tumors (confinement ratios of 0.4 ± 0.2 versus 0.6 ± 0.2). Consistently, the arrest coefficient was higher in EG7 (33 ± 17%) than in EL4 (13 ± 17%) tumors. During the late phase of rejection, the motility of OT1-GFP cells in EG7 increased to 8 ± 3 μm/min−1 to become similar to the mean velocity of OT1-GFP cells in EL4 tumors (10 ± 5 μm/min−1). The migration trajectories also became less confined (0.6 ± 0.2) and identical to the ones observed in EL4 tumors. Finally, the arrest coefficient in EG7 tumors dropped to 14 ± 16%, which is close to that of OT1-GFP cells in EL4 tumors (16 ± 21%). We conclude that CTLs transiently stop moving in antigen-expressing tumors during the early phase and then resume their migration during the late phase when the size of the tumor starts to decrease.

OT1-GFP stop in contact with OVA-expressing tumor cells
To investigate if this transient arrest of migration of the OT1-GFP cells in EG7 tumors was caused by the recognition of tumor cells by the CTLs, EG7 and EL4 tumor cells were transfected with GFP-encoding plasmid. The GFP-expressing tumors behaved like their GFP-negative counterparts in terms of tumor growth and rejection after transfer of OT1 cells. Tumor cell viability in vivo was determined at different time points by the level and the distribution of intracellular GFP using two-photon microscopy. During the early phase of tumor rejection, tumor cells formed a dense network of bright living cells in both EL4-GFP and EG7-GFP tumors, similar to that observed in the absence of OT1 cells (Fig. 3 A). In the late phases of rejection, in control EG7 tumors, but not EL4 tumors, were mainly composed of residual dead tumor cells, i.e., cells displaying lower GFP levels and a GFP-negative, compact nucleus. In EG7 tumors during the late phase, the enhanced second harmonic generation (SHG) signal reflected an increase in the density of collagen fibers (Fig. 3 A), suggesting increased fibrosis in this region of the tumor.

To determine if the cells expressing low levels of GFP observed in the late phase were dead tumor cells or macrophages having engulfed dead tumor cells, we injected the tumor-bearing mice with propidium iodide (PI). As shown in Fig. 3 B, in EG7 tumors during the early phase, when most tumor cells are still alive, few cells are stained with PI. During the late phase, in contrast, all cells displaying low levels of GFP with dark GFP-negative nuclei are labeled by PI (Fig. 3 B). We conclude that during tumor rejection, dead tumor cells accumulate in the periphery of the tumors, most likely before being cleared by macrophages.

The change in the dynamics of OT1 cell motility in the EG7 tumors between the early and late phases could therefore

JEM VOL. 204, February 19, 2007

347