```plaintext
REVIEWS

How are these parameters collectively integrated by 
T cells? Different studies have provided evidence that 
Ca2+ signals are critical for the induction of T-cell arrest 
on antigen recognition^252. It is tempting to speculate 
that the intensity of Ca2+ signals, which can be influ- 
enced by many factors, reflects the overall strength of 
stimulation and directs T-cell behaviour during antigen 
recognition. It is likely that future studies will lead to 
the identification of new molecules that regulate the 
stability of T-cell–DC interactions in vivo. It will be 
equally important to determine which of these numer- 
ous parameters can be regulated during the immune 
response and can act as a molecular switch for the 
formation of stable contacts.

Distinct contacts, distinct outcomes?
Linking the outcome of T-cell activation and contact 
dynamics. The complex regulation of T-cell–DC contact 
dynamics suggested that the pattern of interactions that is 
experienced by an individual T cell may reflect and possi- 
bly dictate its function. Studies that compared T-cell–DC 
dynamics in experimental settings correlated alterations 
in contact dynamics with different functional outcomes 
(FIG. 2). Most often, conditions that induced robust T-cell 
activation were associated with stable interactions and 
T-cell arrest on DCs. For example, CD8+ T cells arrested 
on DCs following an immunization regimen that led to 
T-cell priming: anti-DEC-205–OVA plus lipopolysac- 
charide (LPS) but not following prim immunizations reg- 
imens that resulted in T-cell tolerance (anti-DEC-205–OVA 
alone)^9. Similarly, a lower level of CD4+ T-cell activation 
observed in the presence of high numbers of regulatory 
T cells has been correlated with a reduced stability of 
CD4+ T-cell–DC contacts^133. Finally, the lack of stable 
interactions between CD8+ T cells and ICAM1-deficient 
DCs following immunization with anti-DEC-205–OVA 
was associated with impaired T-cell memory formation.

However, exceptions to this general trend have also 
been reported. For example, a reagent with anti- 
DEC-205 that was conjugated to a potent antigenic 
peptide efficiently triggered T-cell arrest on DCs, yet 
induced CD4+ T-cell tolerance^9. Similarly, the formation 
of stable clusters of CD4+ T cells has been documented 
following administration of an oral immunization reg- 
imen that induced tolerance^6. In summary, these studies 
support the idea that stable T-cell–DC interactions are 
necessary but not sufficient for optimal T-cell priming.

Manipulating T-cell–DC contacts in vivo. An alternative 
strategy for investigating the extent to which T-cell–DC 
interaction dynamics shape the outcome of T-cell activa- 
tion consists of experimentally manipulating T-cell–DC 
contacts in the lymph node and measuring changes in 
T-cell activation. A strategy to synchronize the forma- 
tion and the dissociation of CD4+ T-cell–DC interactions 
in vivo has been exploited to identify the T-cell 
activation profile that is induced by an interaction of a 
defined duration^6. At least 6 hours of contact between a 
CD4+ T cell and an antigen-presenting mature DC were 
required to initiate clonal expansion, whereas inter- 
actions of 24 hours resulted in 5–6 rounds of cell division.

These results highlight the importance of prolonged 
interactions for efficient CD4+ T-cell activation in vivo. 
Moreover, using multiple injections of antigen-bearing 
DCs, it has also been possible to test the impact of mul- 
tiple DC encounters on T-cell activation programmes. 
After their initial activation, CD4+ T cells were shown to 
be capable of integrating signals during subsequent con- 
tacts with DCs, a process that was particularly important 
for IFNγ production^55.

Heterogeneity of T-cell fates. A common feature of most 
T-cell responses is the generation of heterogeneous popu- 
lations of effectors and memory T cells^256. The fact that 
T-cell fate is closely linked to T-cell–DC contact dynam- 
ics raises the possibility that differences in the number 
and stability of DC encounters that are experienced by 
different antigen-specific T cells could shape the func- 
tional heterogeneity of the T-cell response. This theory 
has been challenged by an elegant study that analysed 
the T-cell response mounted by a single antigen-specific 
T cell adoptively transferred under microscop control^6. 
Although the progeny of each individual T cell was highly 
diverse, the progenies of different T cells were quite 
similar to one another, which suggests that diversifica- 
tion of T-cell fate might not originate from differences 
in initial antigen-recognition events. As strong antigen 
stimuli were used in this study, clonal stimulation of all 
antigen-specific T cells might have been provided. In 
contrast to the generation of a diverse pool of effector 
and memory T cells, the recent observation that 
the initial T-cell division can be asymmetric and that the 
daughter cells might adopt divergent fates suggests a 
newly described mechanism for the functional diversi- 
fication of T cells^257. Interestingly, asymmetric T-cell division 
was associated with strong molecular clustering at the 
immunological synapse, a feature that could be favoured 
by stable T-cell–DC interactions.

T-cell–DC contacts during infection. Our current knowl- 
edge of the dynamics of T-cell activation in vivo has 
been generated with model antigens that were directly 
targeted to DCs. Although these studies have been 
instrumental for dissecting spatio-temporal aspects of 
T-cell–DC interactions, they provide only partial insights 
into how T cells are primed by DCs during viral, bacte- 
rial or parasitic infections. With each pathogen comes 
a unique combination of parameters that ultimately 
shapes T-cell–DC communication in the lymph node. 
Among these are the type, number and localization of 
antigen-bearing DCs, the cytokine and/or chemokine 
milieu, the level and kinetics of antigen presentation, and 
the TCR affinities of the responding T cells.

To take these crucial aspects into consideration, it will 
be fundamental to unravel the mode and regulation of 
T-cell–DC interactions during infection with different 
pathogens. One report analysed CD8+ T-cell priming in 
mice that had been infected subcutaneously with a vac- 
cinia virus or vesicular stomatitis virus that had both 
been engineered to express an ovalbumin epitope^9.

682 | SEPTEMBER 2008 | VOLUME 8                                                                 www.nature.com/reviews/immunol

© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
```