RE VIEWS

of the TCR for the antigen. When this probability is 
low, T cells engage in numerous unsuccessful attempts 
before arresting on a DC. Because T cells that arrest 
following antigen recognition initiate a contact that will 
last for hours, stable contacts are expected to progres-
sively accumulate until they become the dominant type 
of interactions.

These three models are not mutually exclusive and it 
is likely that both simple probabilistic considerations and 
intrinsic changes at the level of T cells and DCs account 
for changes in contact dynamics over time. However, in 
all cases, T-cell arrest on DCs occurs preferentially under 
optimal conditions of antigen recognition, and the vari-
ous sequences of T-cell–DC contacts might reflect the 
ability of T cells to choose the best partner to establish a 
prolonged interaction and to avoid being ‘distracted’ by 
DCs that will not provide enough stimulation.

Molecular regulation of T-cell arrest
What is the molecular basis of the formation of stable 
versus transient T-cell–DC contacts? The amount 
and the quality of peptide–MHC ligands largely con-
tributes to determining the nature of these contacts. 
Increasing the number of peptide–MHC complexes 
on each DC favours the occurrence of stable inter-
actions with antigen-specific T cells48, and it has been 
estimated that stable contacts can be formed with DCs 
that present approximately 100 peptide–MHC com-
plexes49. One report classified a set of altered-peptide 
ligands based on their ability to stimulate CD4+ 
T cells, and found that high- but not low-potency 
ligands induced T-cell arrest50. Adhesion molecules, 
such as intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1), 
can also be crucial for T-cell arrest on DCs following 
antigen recognition. Indeed, antigen-specific CD8+ 
T-cell arrest that was observed following the immuni-
zation of wild-type mice with anti-DEC-205 OVA and 
CD40-specific antibody was lost in ICAM1-deficient 
recipient51. Whether variations in ICAM1 expression 
levels in wild-type mice dictate changes in T-cell–DC 
contact dynamics remains to be elucidated. Conversely, 
the expression of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 
(CTLA4) by T cells, a co-receptor that profoundly 
downmodulates T-cell activation, can override T-cell 
arrest following antigen recognition50. 
Not surprisingly, intracellular signalling molecules 
also participate in the regulation of T-cell–DC contact 
stability. Recent results suggested that protein kinase θ 
(PKCθ) favours the occurrence of dynamic and short-
lived interactions between naive T cells and DCs51. 
This study showed that, during antigen recognition by 
T cells on lipid bilayers, PKCθ promotes the periodic 
destabilization of the immunological synapse, which 
was associated with bursts of T-cell motility. In addition, 
PKCθ-deficient CD4+ T cells displayed an increased ten-
dency to adhere on APCs in vivo following intravenous 
injection of the cognate antigenic peptide. On the other 
hand, the Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP), 
which is an actin regulator, was found to be essential 
for re-establishing stable synapses in vitro after these 
periodic destabilizations51.

a DC maturation model

T cell

STOP

DC maturation

DC

Time

b T-cell signal integration model

T cell

STOP

T-cell signal 
integration

DC

Time

c Probabilistic model

T cell

STOP

STOP

DC

T cell

DC

Time

Figure 3 | Models for the gradual accumulation of stable T-cell–DC interactions 
over time. a | In this model, the maturation state of the dendritic cell (DC) dictates T-cell 
arrest. Over time, DCs gain the ability to establish long-lived interactions with T cells. 
b | T cells sum signals that are received during initial transient contacts with DCs. Once 
a threshold of received signals is reached, T cells gain the ability to establish stable 
interactions with DCs. c | At each encounter, T-cell arrest on a DC has a certain 
probability of occurring, which is determined by the overall signal strength. Also, in this 
model, long-lived T-cell–DC interactions are expected to accumulate over time.

Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome 
protein
(WASP). WASP is an actin 
regulator that is involved in the 
formation of the immunological 
synapse. Mutations in WASP 
cause a life-threatening X-linked 
immunodeficiency that is 
characterized by 
thrombocytopenia with small 
platelets, eczema, recurrent 
infections and an increased 
incidence of autoimmune 
manifestations and malignancies.

was injected, some CD8+ T cells formed early stable 
interactions with low-peptide-concentration-pulsed 
DCs. An attractive interpretation of this experiment 
is that CD8+ T cells became capable of establishing 
stable interactions with low-peptide-concentration-
pulsed DCs more rapidly, by ‘remembering’ signals 
that had been integrated from early encounters with 
high-peptide-concentration-pulsed DCs.

Finally, a purely probabilistic model could also explain 
the evolution of contact dynamics over time (FIG. 3c). In 
this model, T cells have a defined probability to arrest on 
a DC following an encounter with antigen that is deter-
mined by the strength of stimulation and the affinity 

NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY

VOLUME 8 | SEPTEMBER 2008 | 645

© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved