```plaintext
REVIEWS

Finally, in a third approach, subcutaneous injection of 
the CFSE (5,6-carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl 
ester) fluorescent dye together with cytokines and anti-
gen that is adsorbed to the adjuvant alum has been used 
to deliver antigen to and label endogenous skin DCs that 
subsequently traffic to the lymph nodes51. It should be 
noted that each of these approaches targets subsets of 
DCs that might differ in their ability to interact with and 
activate antigen-specific naive T cells.

Visualizing the antigen. In addition to methods for track-
ing DCs, alternative approaches have been developed to 
visualize the presence of antigen within APCs. For exam-
ple, an autoquenched version of the ovalbumin protein 
(OVA) that becomes fluorescent on proteolytic cleavage 
inside APCs can be injected intravenously to visualize 
the kinetics of antigen processing and presentation to 
T cells52. In addition, Tang et al. used a mouse strain 
in which green fluorescent protein (GFP) is expressed 
under the control of the mouse insulin I promoter on the 
non-obese diabetic (NOD)-genetic background to track 
endogenous DCs that had engulfed GFP-positive cells53. 
They noted the presence of 20–300 GFP-positive DCs 
in the pancreatic lymph nodes of these mice and showed 
that these cells were actively presenting islet antigens to 
both CD4+CD25+ T-helper cells and regulatory T cells. 
Finally, recombinant viruses expressing GFP molecules 
were used to model antigenic peptide and the 
influenza nucleoprotein to assess the kinetics and 
virus-infected cells and to analyse their interactions with 
antigen-specific CD8+ T cells54.

Diversity of T-cell–DC contacts in vivo
Results of in vitro experiments support the idea that anti-
gen recognition by T cells is associated with T-cell arrest 
on the APC (also referred to as the T-cell stop signal) 
and the formation of long-lasting contacts27,28. This view 
was challenged by the finding that naive T cells estab-
lished multiple short contacts (less than 10 minutes in 
duration) with antigen-bearing DCs when placed in a 
collagen matrix, and became activated by this process28. 
Two-photon imaging of T cell–DC contacts in vivo was 
an ideal way to resolve this controversy and to determine 
whether T-cell activation in vivo relies on interactions 
with DCs that last for minutes or hours. However, instead 
of providing the simple answer researchers were looking 
for, experiments carried out by several groups in differ-
ent experimental systems revealed that there is a high 
degree of diversity in T-cell–DC contact dynamics. This 
complexity raised the exciting hypothesis that the can-
cellation of T-cell–DC contact dynamics was an essential 
component of the T-cell activation process.

Contacts in the absence of antigen. Owing to the vigor-
ous intranodal motility of T cells, individual DCs in the 
lymph node constantly experience new encounters with 
T cells (see Supplementary information S2 (movie)). 
Imaging of T-cell–DC contacts in the absence of anti-
gen revealed that 500–5,000 distinct T cells were ‘seen’ 
by each DC every hour15,21. Such impressive rates of 
encounter provided a satisfactory explanation for how 
a small number of antigen-bearing DCs can establish a 
‘dialogue’ with rare antigen-specific T cells to initiate 
an immune response. During an encounter with a DC 
that is not presenting cognate antigen, a T cell does not 
stop crawling but might experience a slight decelera-
tion and remain in contact for 3–5 minutes. Although 
calcium signals in T cells during these brief encounters 
are infrequent15,30, these contacts might be functionally 
important, as naive CD4+ T cells that are prevented from 
engaging MHC class II molecules on the surface of APCs 
progressively lose their motility in lymph nodes15.

The rate of T-cell–DC contacts in the absence of 
antigen recognition is not solely the result of random 
collision events. CD8+ T cells tend to encounter DCs 
that have already established a cognate interaction with 
another CD4+ or a CD8+ T cell more frequently16,17,31. 
Chemokines, such as CC-chemokine ligand 3 (CCL3) 
and CCL4, are produced at the site of T-cell–DC 
conjugates and increase the chance for migrating 
CC-chemokine receptor (CCR5)-expressing CD8+ 
T cells to contact DCs by a factor of 4 to 8 (REFS 16,32). 
This mechanism could drive the recruitment of CD8+ 
T cells by the most competent DCs and favour the for-
mation of three-cell clusters as well as promote collabo-
ration between T cells. Finally, T-cell behaviour can also 
be influenced by the presence of chemokines that are 
bound to the surface of DCs when T cells encounter 
APCs that have been pulsed with CCR7 ligands17. 

Transient contacts in the presence of antigen. T cell 
interactions with antigen-bearing DCs can result in 
transient, dynamic contacts that last no more than 10 
minutes (TABLE 1). In fact, these contacts are hardly dis-
tinguishable from those of T cells that are interacting 
with DCs in the absence of antigen15,33. Conceivably, 
these interactions could be completely unproductive, 
with T cells simply ‘missing’ the detection of cognate 
antigen on the DCs if, for example, limiting amounts 
of peptide–MHC complexes were present at the contact 
zone. However, data in the literature suggest that at least 
a fraction of these interactions results in some level of 
T-cell activation. For example, following immunization 
with OVA that is conjugated to DEC-205-specific anti-
body (anti-DEC-205–OVA), a regimen that induces an 
initial state of activation followed by tolerance, the vast 
majority of OVA-specific CD8+ T cells do not arrest on 
DCs36. This observation indicates that T-cell activation 
signals can be delivered in vivo in the absence of T-cell 
arrest. A similar conclusion was drawn when studying 
CD4+ T-cell activation and energy following administra-
tion of a DEC-205-specific antibody that is conjugated 
to a low potency ligand37. The first hours of CD8+ T cells 
interacting with peptide-pulsed DCs can be dominated 
by transient contacts, yet many T cells upregulate their 

678 | SEPTEMBER 2008 | VOLUME 8                                                                 www.nature.com/reviews/immunol

© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
```