REVIEWS

Box 1 | Lymph-node explants and intravital preparations

Cahalan and colleagues carried out the first two-photon study of CD4+ T-cell activation\(^1\). They used explanted inguinal lymph nodes that were maintained at 37°C and perfused with media bubbled with a gas mixture containing 95% O\(_2\) and 5% CO\(_2\). In these settings, which resemble those used by neurobiologists to image brain slices, both a physiological temperature and the presence of oxygen were crucial for observing vigorous T-cell motility. A refined analysis of the perfusion requirement for the proper imaging of lymph-node explants has been provided recently\(^41\). Subsequently, preparations for intravital imaging of the inguinal and the popliteal lymph nodes were described and confirmed the motile behaviour of T cells that has been seen in explants\(^2,3,42\). Although intravital preparations have the advantage of maintaining blood and lymph flow, they are more time-consuming, which makes it difficult to image multiple lymph nodes in the same experiment. One interesting advantage that is conferred by intravital imaging is the possibility of injecting a molecule of interest into the blood stream and watching its effect in real-time as it diffuses in endogenous cell groups. This approach was used successfully to visualize changes in T-cell–DC contacts following intravenous injection of antigen\(^2,6\), of an MHC class II-specific antibody\(^5\) or changes in T-cell motility following subcutaneous injection of the CC-chemokine ligand 19 (CCL19)\(^4\).

for periods of up to a few hours (FIG. 1b). The multi-dimensional data set that is thus generated can be displayed as a time-lapse movie (see Supplementary information S1 (movie)), and important information can then be extracted from these videos through manual or automated analyses (FIG. 1c). For example, measurement of T-cell velocity and trajectory confinement (that is, whether T cells move in a confined area) can be used to assess the motility of T cells. In addition, analysis of cell–cell encounters can offer insights into the contribution of chemokine-driven migration in this process. Kinetic parameters that are followed over time provide information on the stability of T-cell–DC interactions. Furthermore, real-time monitoring of cytosolic Ca\(^{2+}\) concentration in T cells using TPLSM approaches might help to identify when and where signals are exchanged. Undoubtedly, read-outs that detect signalling molecules or that assess gene expression will soon be included with imaging experiments to further extend the biological questions that can be addressed with this technology. Similarly to other assays, the most meaningful measurements are obtained in studies that compare different experimental conditions: for example, when mutant and wild-type cells or DCs are compared, or when investigating different immunization regimens. Last, some of the measurements derived from two-photon movies can be used to calibrate computational models to test specific hypotheses and make new predictions about T-cell migration and activation\(^7\).

Studying T-cell–DC dynamics in vivo
Visualizing T cells. T cells in lymph nodes migrate at high velocities, on average at about 11–14 μm per minute\(^1\). Their trajectories are largely chaotic, if not random. However, a close look at their intranodal migration revealed a role for the fibroblastic reticular-cell network in guiding T-cell movement\(^8\). To track T cells, most experiments have relied on the adoptive transfer of high numbers of fluorescently tagged CD4+ or CD8+ T cells that express a transgenic TCR. With this strategy,

it is possible to introduce large numbers of T cells so that many of them can be detected in the lymph node that is imaged. Furthermore, it ensures that all imaged T cells have a common TCR specificity and display relatively homogenous behaviour in response to antigen.

However, this methodology is not without potential drawbacks. In particular, a high T-cell precursor frequency increases the occurrence of intraclonal T-cell competition and affects the outcome of T-cell activation, especially if the antigen is limiting\(^9,10\). In this respect, profound differences in the dynamics of T-cell–DC interactions have been observed by varying the number of adoptively transferred T cells\(^11,12\). Stable T-cell–DC interactions were rapidly inhibited when the number of responding T cells was too high, thereby providing a cellular basis for intraclonal competition and suggesting the existence of feedback mechanism for the termination of T-cell clonal expansion. An important implication of this observation is that care should be taken when interpreting T-cell–DC contact dynamics in experimental settings that favour T-cell competition.

Visualizing dendritic cells. Visualization of DCs has been achieved using a number of different approaches\(^2\). The first strategy relies on the intradermal or subcutaneous injection of a purified DC population\(^14,15\). Bone-marrow-derived or splenic DCs that are labelled with a vital dye that expresses a fluorescent protein can be pulsed with antigen ex vivo and then injected into a host. This approach is particularly useful to distinguish between DC subsets that are loaded with distinct antigenic peptides and exposed to different T cells so that the occurrence of T-cell–DC interactions can be followed over time\(^15,16,17\). Approximately 12–18 hours post-injection, a fraction of the transferred DCs is found in the draining lymph nodes and has high expression levels of MHC class II and co-stimulatory molecules. In the lymph nodes, the majority of DCs are slow motile cells (and move at a rate of 3–6 μm per minute) that display frequent shape changes and dendrite extensions (see Supplementary information S2 (movie)). Within 3 days, these DCs lose their motility as they become integrated into the network of lymph-node DCs and die rapidly.

The second approach relies on a mouse strain that was generated by Newson and colleagues in which the yellow fluorescent protein molecule is expressed under the control of the CD11c promoter\(^18\). In these mice, the strong fluorescent signal readily reveals a network of lymph-node resident DCs that is made of tightly packed sessile cells (see Supplementary information S2 (movie)). This model is particularly useful for the study of T-cell interactions with endogenous lymph-node DCs following the delivery of antigen. Because both antigen-bearing and non-bearing DCs are present, strategies that deliver antigen to a large fraction of lymph-node DCs are preferred so that it can be assumed that most DCs have the capability to establish cognate interactions with T cells. For example, coupling antigen to an antibody that is specific for the endocytic receptor DEC-205 has been used by several groups to target antigen to DEC-205+ DCs\(^19,20\).

Phototoxicity
The phenomenon by which illumination of fluorochrome-labelled molecules in a cell causes damage and eventually cell death, most likely owing to the formation of oxygen radicals.

Intraclonal T-cell competition
The process during which numerous T cells face a limiting resource (such as antigen or cytokines) that results in a diminished T-cell activation efficiency on a per cell basis.

DEC-205
A membrane glycoprotein expressed by CD8+ DCs that acts as an endocytic receptor. Genetic or chemical coupling of antigenic fragments to a DEC-205-specific antibody permits efficient delivery of the conjugate to a large proportion of DCs in lymphoid tissues.

676 | SEPTEMBER 2008 | VOLUME 8

www.nature.com/reviews/immunol

© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved