```plaintext
ARTICLES

ing both B7-H1 and B7-1. We had shown pre-
viously that tumors induced by inoculation of
B7-1P815 cells in syngeneic DBA/2 mice
regress completely after transient growth, and
that tumor resistance is mediated by costimu-
lated T-cell responses13. Expression of B7-H1 in
B7-1 P815 led to progressive growth of tu-
mors. Expression of B7-H1 alone on P815,
however, did not affect tumor growth (Fig.
5d). The effect of B7-H1 on tumor growth is
not due to clonal variation during the selec-
tion of B7-H1 transfectants, because all tu-
mors from transfectants grew progressively at
the same rate in immunodeficient BALB/c
nude mice (data not shown). Our results thus
further support the notion that B7-H1 expres-
sion on tumor cells might downregulate active
tumor immunity in vivo.

Discussion
Cancer progression has been attributed to a
variety of immune evasion strategies. These
include downregulation of cell-surface MHC
class I molecules, secretion of immunosup-
pressive factors (for example, transforming
growth factor-β), and lack of T-cell costimula-
tion28. Here, we describe a new observation
that B7-H1 is expressed in many human can-
cers and promotes the apoptotic death of acti-
vated tumor-reactive T cells. Tumor T cells
in vitro and antigen-specific T cells in a
mouse P815 tumor model in vivo reveal a
new mechanism of tumor evasion of which
we have a new approach to the design of T cell–
based immunotherapy.

FasL is a determinant of immune-privileged
status in the eyes and testes30. It was originally
thought that its expression on tumor cells
might lead to T cell31,32. Most normal and malig-
nant human neoplasms express FasL, however, and transfection
of tumor cells with FasL does not always promote T-cell apopto-
sis31–33. In this study, we found that cell-surface expression of B7-
H1 in normal tissues is limited to macrophages (Fig. 1), a result
consistent with our laboratory’s earlier report that freshly iso-
lated monocytes express B7-H1 34. In contrast, we found that B7-
H1 immunoreactivity localizes in a majority of melanomas and
carcinomas of lung, ovary and colon, in both the plasma mem-
brane and cytoplasm. The mechanisms regulating B7-H1 expres-
sion in tumor cells are not known. Inflammatory mediators are
implicated by the upregulation of B7-H1 expression on the sur-
face of several tumor lines after exposure to IFN-γ
(Supplementary Table 1 online). We also noted that B7-H1 ex-
pression was more frequent in freshly isolated cancer tissue spec-
imens than in cultured tumor cell lines. This observation may
reflect the cytokine milieu of the cancer patients.

Taken together with our previous report that B7-H1 stimula-
tion promotes production of IL-10, a cytokine implicated in the
death of activated T cells27, our results imply that multiple mech-
anisms may contribute to the death of activated T cells after ex-
posure to tumor-associated B7-H1. In fact, our results support
the finding that both IL-10 and FasL are involved in apoptosis of
T cells, and blocking these molecules with neutralizing mono-

Fig. 3 Human breast carcinoma HBL-100 constitutively expressing B7-H1 promotes apoptosis
of the CEA-specific M99 CD8+ CTLs. a, FACS analysis of cell-surface B7-H1, FasL and TRAIL on
HBL-100 cells. HBL-100 cells were stained by monoclonal antibodies against B7-H1 (5H1), FasL
and TRAIL or PD-1Ig. Positive staining is shown as shaded lines and control-antibody staining as
open bold lines. b, Absence of PD-1 expression on M99 T cells. After 4 d of culture with HBL100
cells and IL-15, M99 T cells were doubly stained with monoclonal antibodies against CD8 and
against PD-1 or with B7-H1Ig. CD8-positive cells were gated for FACS analysis. Positive staining is
shown as filled lines and control antibody or immunoglobulin (Ig) staining as open lines.
c, Abrogation of M99 CTL apoptosis by monoclonal antibody against B7-H1, but not by PD-1Ig.
HBL-100 cells were incubated in the presence of control Ig (○), 5H1 monoclonal antibody (□)
or PD-1Ig (△) at the indicated doses before mixing with M99 CTLs. After 4 d,
cells were stained with annexin V and antibody against CD8 for apoptosis assay and with
trypan blue for viability assay. Tumor-induced apoptosis of T cells was calculated as (apoptotic
T cells in tumor cultures) – (apoptotic T cells in medium control cultures) × 1 × 100%, and pre-
sented as means ± s.d. of cells from 3 wells of each treatment. The results are representative of 3
experiments. *, significantly different from the control Ig group, P < 0.05.

clonal antibody partially and inhibited T cell death. Blocking the Fas
pathway also resulted in inhibition of tumor cell growth in vitro.
Although neutralization of IL-10 partially blocked T cell apopto-
sis (Fig. 4a), tumor growth in vitro was not affected (Fig. 4b).
Whereas Fas is the effector molecule that directly triggers apop-
tosis, the effect of IL-10 is probably indirect and regulated by
some unknown factor(s) in the cultures. TRAIL-mediated mecha-
nisms do not seem to contribute to the triggering of apoptosis,
because neither 624mel cells nor HBL-100 cells express this pro-
tein (Figs. 2 and 3). Recent studies implicate RACS1, a coiled-coil
membrane protein, in the apoptosis of activated T cells in vitro32.
It is unknown, however, whether RACS1 is involved in B7-H1
mediated apoptosis.

The proliferation of T cells in the presence of optimal doses of
monoclonal antibody against CD3 can be inhibited by B7-H113,
but this inhibition does not occur if PD-1-deficient T cells are
used, indicating that PD-1 may deliver a negative signal for T-
cell proliferation34. The nature of the inhibition is less clear. It
might result from increased programmed cell death after ligation
of PD-1 by B7-H1—a particularly attractive hypothesis because
PD-1 was originally cloned from a T-cell line undergoing apopto-
sis35. In the M15 clone, apoptosis could be blocked (Fig. 2) by sol-
uble PD-1Ig, suggesting that PD-1 might be a receptor for B7-H1

NATURE MEDICINE • VOLUME 8 • NUMBER 8 • AUGUST 2002

797
```