```plaintext
ARTICLES

Tumor-associated B7-H1 promotes T-cell apoptosis: A potential mechanism of immune evasion

HAIDONG DONG1, SCOTT E. STROME2, DIVA R. SALOMAO3, HIDETO TAMURA1, FUMIYA HIRANO1, 
DALLAS B. FLIES1, PATRICK C. ROCHE3, JUN LU1, GEFENG ZHU1, KOJI TAMADA1, 
VANDA A. LENNON3,4, ESTEBAN CELIS5 & LIEPING CHEN1

1Departments of Immunology, 2Otorhinolaryngology, 3Laboratory Medicine and Pathology and 
4Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA 
Correspondence should be addressed to L.C.; email: chen.lieping@mayo.edu

Published online: 24 June 2002, doi:10.1038/nm730

B7-H1, a recently described member of the B7 family of costimulatory molecules, is thought to 
be involved in the regulation of cellular and humoral immune responses through the PD-1 re- 
ceptor on activated T and B cells. We report here that, except for cells of the macrophage lin- 
eage, normal human tissues do not express B7-H1. In contrast, B7-H1 is abundant in human 
carcinomas of lung, ovary and colon and in melanomas. The pro-inflammatory cytokine inter- 
feron-γ upregulates B7-H1 on the surface of tumor cell lines. Cancer cell–associated B7-H1 in- 
creases apoptosis of antigen-specific human T-cell clones in vitro, and the apoptotic effect of 
B7-H1 is mediated largely by one or more receptors other than PD-1. In addition, expression of 
B7-H1 on mouse P815 tumor increases apoptosis of activated tumor-reactive T cells and pro- 
motes the growth of highly immunogenic B7-1+ tumors in vivo. These findings have implica- 
tions for the design of T cell–based cancer immunotherapy.

Interactions among subsets of immune cells through costimulatory 
molecules and their receptors transmit biochemical signals 
that amplify, dampify, differentiate and terminate immune re- 
sponses. Abrogation of costimulatory activity, by administration 
of monoclonal antibodies and soluble receptors that neutralize 
costimulatory molecules, or by gene-targeted disruption of their 
expression, results in compromised cellular and humoral im- 
mune responses. This can be beneficial when it inhibits autoim- 
mune diseases and rejection of transplanted organs12. The lack 
of costimulatory activation can be detrimental, however, if it 
compromises immune responses against cancer13. In addition to 
their costimulatory function, many receptor–ligand interactions 
are known to trigger anti-apoptotic pathways that prevent acti- 
vation-induced T-cell death14,15. For example, triggering of CD28, 
4-1BB and OX40 receptors costimulates growth of T cells and 
prevents the death of activated T cells16. In contrast, engage- 
ment of CTLA-4, a second receptor of B7-1 and B7-2, may inhibit 
the growth of T cells by blocking cell-cycle progression10,11.

B7-H1 is a cell-surface glycoprotein belonging to the B7 family 
of costimulatory molecules. Stimulation of primary human 
T cells in vitro with immobilized B7-H1 in the form of an im- 
munoglobulin fusion protein (B7-H1Ig), along with mono- 
clonal antibody against CD3 as a surrogate antigen, enhances 
T-cell growth and IL-10 secretion17. In addition, cell-associated 
B7-H1 costimulates T-cell growth, as demonstrated by stimulat- 
ing proliferation of resting allogeneic CD4+ T cells18. 
Administration of B7-H1 enhances CD4+ T-cell responses to 
KLH and increases T helper cell–dependent synthesis of TNP 
hapten–specific IgG2a17. Taken together, our results indicate that 
B7-H1 may be involved in promoting Th2-biased responses. 
Engagement of the PD-1 receptor by B7-H1 (PD-L1), however, in- 
hibits proliferation and cytokine production by activated 
T cells18. In addition, PD-1-deficient mice develop systemic au- 
toimmune diseases15,16. An alternative explanation for these ob- 
servations is that receptor(s) other than PD-1 may be engaged by 
B7-H1 to regulate T-cell responses.

Northern-blot analyses have shown B7-H1 mRNA transcripts 
in a variety of non-lymphoid parenchymal organs, including the 
heart, placenta, skeletal muscle and lung17. The wide distribution 
of B7-H1 is suggestive of a broad role in local tissue physiology. 
Here we detected B7-H1 protein in human cancers we exam- 
ined but not in normal tissues. Further study indicated that 
activated T cells interacting with tumor-associated B7-H1 led to 
programmed cell death. This suggests a mechanism by which tu- 
mors may evade immune destruction.

Human cancers but not normal tissues express B7-H1 
We used monoclonal antibody specific for B7-H1 to determine 
immunohistochemically whether sites of B7-H1 protein expres- 
sion correlated to sites of mRNA expression. We did not detect 
immunoreactivity in any normal solid tissue examined, includ- 
ing breast, colon, pancreas, kidney, uterus, skeletal muscle and 
lung (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Figs. A and B online). Notably, 
we detected immunoreactive macrophages in liver, lung and 
thymus (data not shown). This finding accords with our earlier report that a 
population of peripheral blood monocytes constitutively ex- 
presses B7-H119.

FACS analysis of tumor lines derived from a variety of human 
tissues showed surface B7-H1 expression on 4 of 9 lung carcino- 
mas and 1 of 3 ovarian carcinomas. We did not detect surface ex- 
pression of B7-H1 on colonic or duodenal cell lines (4), leukemia 
(5), choriocarcinoma (2) or melanoma lines (6). When treated 

NATURE MEDICINE • VOLUME 8 • NUMBER 8 • AUGUST 2002 793
```