```plaintext
ARTICLES

that delivers an apoptotic signal to M15 T cells. An alternative 
explanation is that M15 T cells express one or more high-affinity 
receptors other than PD-1 that compete with the binding of B7-
H1 to PD-1 to deliver the apoptotic signal. Similarly, soluble 
CTLA-4 has been observed to compete with the binding of B7-1 
and B7-2 ligands to CD28 (ref. 34). However, PD-1 is expressed 
on only a fraction of activated mouse and human peripheral 
T cells35, 36. Although PD-1Ig significantly inhibited apoptosis of 
M15, a PD-1+CD8+ CTL line, it did not inhibit apoptosis of M99, 
a PD-1– CD8+ CTL line that expresses a B7-H1Ig binding activity. 
More notably, the induction of apoptosis in polyclonal human T 
cells by anti-CD3 and B7-H1Ig was not inhibited by PD-1Ig. Our 
data thus support the possibility that B7-H1 might bind recep-
tor(s) other than PD-1 to transmit the apoptotic signal. B7-H1 
might simultaneously bind to PD-1 as well as to the putative, 
noninhibitive receptor, as PD-1 does not interfere with the apop-
totic effect of B7-H1.

In our experiment, engagement of human primary T cells by 
B7-H1Ig in the presence of monoclonal antibody against CD3 
led to early proliferation (using fresh costimulation) and sub-
sequent inhibition (resulting from programmed death of acti-
vated T cells). Neither costimulation or apoptosis of T cells in 
this system were blocked by PD-1Ig (Fig. 4a and Supplementary 
Fig. 6 online). These observations suggest that costimulation 
and induction of apoptosis by B7-H1 might be mediated by the 
same receptor, which is distinct from PD-1. Taken together with 
our data showing the expression of different B7-H1 receptors in T-
cell clones (Figs 2 and 3), this indicates that B7-H1 might regu-
late different subsets of lymphocytes by different receptors.

Our results have implications for the design of T-cell-based im-
munotherapy. For example, adoptive immunotherapeutic strategies 
require the infusion of pre-activated T cells. If confronted by an 
apoptotic molecule such as B7-H1, tumor-specific T cells would 
be deleted selectively at the tumor site. Our findings also predict 
that tumors expressing B7-H1 will be more resistant to cancer 
vaccines, and that blockade of B7-H1 by specific monoclonal an-
tibodies or soluble inhibitors might enhance CTL killing of es-
tablished cancers.

Methods

Monoclonal antibodies and fusion proteins. Mouse monoclonal antibodies 
against human B7-H1 were produced by immunizing BALB/c mice with 
human B7-H1Ig37. Two clones (2H1 and 5H1, IgG1) that specifically stained 
B7-H1/293 cells were used for all studies. The 2 antibodies have similar stain-
ing patterns and blocking functions. PD-1Ig was prepared as described37. 
Fab(’)2 fragments of 5H1 were prepared by using the Immobilized Pepsin Kit 
(Pierce, Rockford, Illinois). Monoclonal antibodies against mouse B7-H1 (IgG) 
were produced by immunizing an Armenian hamster with mouse B7-H1Ig37, 
and specifically bound mouse B7-H1 but not mouse B7-1, B7-2, B7-H3, B7-4 or 
human B7-H1 (Zhu et al., unpublished data). Monoclonal antibody against 
ZC cells was purified from the culture supernatant of 1B2 cell37. The mono-
clonal antibodies specific for CD8 (RP-8A), Fas (DX2) and Fas ligand (NOK-
1) and H2-Dd were purchased from BD PharMingen (San Diego, California), 
the rabbit antibodies against human TRAIL from Alexis Biochemicals (San 
Diego, California) and the monoclonal antibody for human PD-1 (J116) from 
eBioscience (San Diego, California). The cells were analyzed by staining spe-
cific monoclonal antibodies and imaging using a FACScan (Becton Dickinson, 
Mountain View, California) and CellQuest software (Becton Dickinson).

Immunohistochemistry. Human tumor lines were either purchased from 
the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, Virginia) or established in 
the authors’ laboratories38,39. Human cancer and normal tissue samples were 
obtained from the Pathology Department and blood samples were 
obtained from the Blood Bank of the Mayo Clinic (Rochester, Minnesota) 
after approval of the Institutional Review Board. Frozen tissues were sectioned and 
stained with monoclonal antibody against B7-H1 (5H1) and with control 
antibody (mouse IgG1) using a standard protocol.

a

b

c

d

Fig. 4 Role of FasL and IL-10 in B7-H1-mediated apoptosis of activated T 
cells. Purified human T cells (2 x 105 cells/well) were cultured with plate-
bound control Ig or B7-H1Ig at 10 µg/ml in the presence of optimal dose of 
antibody against CD3 for 72 h, and then analyzed for antigen expression 
and apoptosis. a, A time course of apoptosis of activated T cells induced by 
anti-CD3 and B7-H1Ig. Human PD-1Ig or control Ig was included in the cul-
ture medium from the beginning. □, control Ig; ■, B7-H1Ig + control Ig; ○, 
B7-H1Ig + PD-1Ig. b, Expression of Fas and FasL. Cells were stained with flu-
orescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated monoclonal antibody against 
Fas, or with purified monoclonal antibody against Fas ligand followed by 
FITC-conjugated goat antibody against mouse IgG (Fab’). Numbers on the 
bar indicate the percentage of positive cells as compared with non-specific 
staining control. c, Blocking effects of antibodies against IL-10 (■), Fas lig-
and (□) or both (■) or control antibody (□). Neutralizing monoclonal anti-
bodies against IL-10 or Fas ligand were added from the beginning of 
culture. Results are representative of 4 experiments shown. d, Blockade 
of Fas-FasL interaction enhanced CTL-mediated inhibition of tumor cell 
growth. M15 CTLs 
were cocultured with 
mock/624mel or B7-
H1/624mel cells for 3 
d. Antibodies against 
Fas ligand (■), IL-10 
(□) or both (■), or 
control antibody (□), 
at 10 µg/ml were 
included from the 
beginning of culture. 
Tumor-cell viability 
was assessed by 
Trypan blue exclusion assay. Data were presented as the mean ± s.d. of cell 
numbers recovered from 3 wells of each treatment. The results are repre-
sentative of 3 experiments. *, significantly different from B7-H1/624mel + 
control antibody group, P < 0.05.

798

NATURE MEDICINE • VOLUME 8 • NUMBER 8 • AUGUST 2002
```