CHX-based measurements are known to work well for measuring the half-lives of short lived proteins (i.e. minutes to a few hours). Medium and long lived proteins require using CHX for many hours, which significantly alters the cell’s biology. Since, many of the tested proteins had half-lives of more than a few hours (as measured using both pulse-chase and bleach-chase) we applied CHX for about 16h. We found that during this time the present cells stopped dividing and some underwent cell-death (~10%). This perturbation may explain, at least in part, why the CHX protocol did not yield accurate half-lives on many of the tested proteins in the present cells. It highlights the importance of non-perturbative methods for assaying removal rates.

5.3 The half-life increase due to drug addition persists for more than two cell-cycle durations

We asked whether the global increase in half-lives persists for more than one cell cycle duration. This is important because cells may require more than one cell-cycle duration in order to sense changes in their protein levels and compensate for them. To test this, we performed additional experiments and measured the half-lives of 10 proteins (CKS2, RPLA22, K-α-1, RPA2, DDX18, VIL2, CALM2, VCL, H2AFV and LMNA) for 48 hours after CPT addition at 20 minutes resolution (no. of repeats ≥ 3). Our aim was to test whether the half-life differential increase observed in the first 24 hours after drug addition persists for a longer duration (24h – 48h). In the proteins that degrade slowly, such a comparison can be done by bleaching the cells at t = 0h and then monitoring the decay of the non-fluorescent for 48 hours. However, in rapidly degrading proteins this approach is inadequate because the non-fluorescent protein disappears within a few hours. To overcome this, we applied bleach-chase at two time points: t = 0h and t = 24h hours after drug addition and traced the decay. We find that the half-lives of most proteins remained roughly constant during the first 48 hours, whereas a few proteins showed a continued increase in their half-lives (e.g. CALM2 showed a half-life of 6.7 ± 1.1 (before drug addition), 11.5 ± 2.9 (0 - 24h after drug addition) and >48h (24 – 48 after drug addition) (Figure S5). These results suggest that the half-life effect persists for the duration of at least two cell-cycles, during which the decrease in dilution is not compensated by means of increased degradation.

5.4 A decrease in intra-cellular degradation is expected to induce a global increase in half-lives in which long-lived proteins are least affected

We showed that the observed global increase of protein half-lives due to different stresses can be quantitatively captured by a decrease in growth arrest (see Fig. 3C). In this section we explore an alternative model that assumes the increase in half-lives is due to a global down-regulation of degradation (e.g. inhibition of ubiquitin-proteasome mediated proteolysis) (see Eq. 3 in Fig. 3B). Our goal is to derive this equation and show

24