Figure S4. The observed differential increase in half-lives is statistically significant. We hypothesized that the longer the half-life of a protein, the larger its increase due to growth arrest. To assess the statistical significance of this assertion we performed the following Monte-carlo shuffling test. First, we computed the deviation (absolute sum of differences) of the measured half-lives after drug from the predicted half-lives due to growth arrest. Then, we shuffled the changes in half-lives (T1/2 after drug) – (T1/2 before drug), and added each of them to the pre-drug half-lives of a randomly selected protein. The null distribution generated by computing the absolute sum of differences over multiple shuffle rounds is shown, yielding a P < 10^-4.

Figure S5. Protein half-lives at t=0-24 and t=24-48 hours after addition remain roughly constant or increase. (A, B) The half-lives of 10 proteins at t = 0 – 24 and t = 24 - 48 hours after drug addition are compared. Most half-lives remained approximately constant or slightly increased. CALM2 and K-α-1 showed a substantial increase in their half-lives. Blue line indicates the predicted increase due to growth arrest.

Figure S6. A few proteins increased their removal in response to the drug CPT. We sought to identify proteins whose half-lives after the drug CPT deviated from the growth arrest model (depicted in Fig. 2A). To this end we computed the log2 ratio between the expected and observed post-drug half-lives. We subtracted or added the measurement error from the observed half-life of each protein so as to minimize this ratio. This correction procedure yields conservative estimations of the ratio (lower bound). The three proteins that showed the most significant deviation, CD44, DDX18 and RPS3A, increased their removal rates in response to the drug, suggesting protein specific removal regulation.

Figure S7. A simulation comparing ‘average protein concentration’ versus ‘average protein levels’ dynamics. (A) Top to bottom panel show: (i) Number of cells as a function of time (in units of cell-cycle) starting with one cell and assuming cell-cycle length variability of 25% across individual cells; (ii) Protein levels of individual cells (in arbitrary units); (iii) Volume of individual cells; (iv) Total protein in the population; (v) Total volume of the population; (vi) ‘Average protein concentration’ (i.e. total protein divided by the total volume of the population) and (vii) ‘Average protein levels’ (i.e. total protein divided by the number of cells). Following the measurements of (19) we use a cell volume that increases exponentially in the cell cycle phase, and protein levels that are proportional to the volume per individual cell. Notice that following a few synchronized cells, results in fluctuating amounts of average protein level, yet robust levels of protein concentration. (B-C) Initial number of cells of non-synchronized cells is 10 and 100 respectively. It can be seen that the average protein levels is more robust the larger the population. Notice that the average protein levels are larger than one reflecting the amount of protein half-way through the cell-cycle.

11