washed twice with cold DPBS then resuspended in 
1× binding buffer at a concentration of 1 × 10^6 cells/ 
mL. A total of 100 μL of the cell suspension con- 
taining 1 × 10^5 cells was incubated with 5 μL of 
each annexin V-FITC and propidium iodide (PI) 
for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. 
Following incubation, 400 μL of 1× binding buffer 
was added to each sample and cells were analyzed 
on a FACSCalibur flow cytometer within 30 min. 
Unstained cells and single stained cells with either 
annexin V-FITC or PI were used as controls. Cells 
incubated at 70°C for 15 min served as a positive 
control for cell death, while cells treated with betu- 
linic acid (16 μg/mL; Sigma) for 24 h served as a 
positive control for apoptosis induction.26

Detection of NOD2

The detection of NOD2 protein expression in 
HaCaT cells was attempted by western blot using 
either total cell lysate or immunoprecipitated 
NOD2. For protein extraction, cells were washed 
twice with PBS, detached with Accutase solution, 
and lysed for 30 min on ice in 1% NP-40 lysis buffer 
supplemented with protease inhibitor 
cocktail (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN, 
USA); the tube was left on ice for 20 min with peri- 
odic vortexing. Lysates were then passed through a 
21-gauge needle up to 10 times, followed by cen- 
trifugation at 10,000g for 20 min at 4°C. The super- 
natant was carefully transferred to a new tube and 
the concentration was determined by DC Protein 
Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). For 
western blot detection, a range (5–50 μg) of HaCaT 
total protein lysate was resolved on 4%–10% 
sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) Tris-glycine gels. 
Proteins were transferred onto a protran-nitrocellu- 
lose membrane (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, 
Freiburg, Germany), blocked in tris-buffered saline 
(TBS) containing 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA; 
Sigma) and 0.05% Tween 20 (Sigma) for 1.5 h, and 
incubated overnight in TBS containing 1% BSA, 
0.05% Tween 20, and 0.25 μg/mL of anti-NOD2 
mouse monoclonal antibody (clone NOD-15) or its 
matching isotype control (BioLegend, San Diego, 
CA, USA). The membrane was washed six times in 
TBS with 0.1% Tween 20 and incubated for 1 h in 
1% BSA containing 1:20,000 rabbit anti-mouse 
IgG horseradish peroxidase conjugate (Santa Cruz 
Biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA). The membrane 
was washed once again and incubated for 5 min 
with chemiluminescent peroxidase substrate (GE 
Healthcare Life Sciences) and detected on film (GE 
Healthcare Life Sciences). For immunoprecipita- 
tion, protein extracts from 2 or 3 × 10^6 HaCaT cells 
were precipitated with 3-μL NOD2-specific rabbit 
anti-serum (Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI, 
USA) or NOD2-specific mouse monoclonal anti- 
body (BioLegend) using Protein G immunoprecipita- 
tion kit (Roche Diagnostics), following the 
manufacturer’s instructions. Immunoprecipitated 
proteins were resolved by western blot analysis and 
probed using 3:10,000 of rabbit NOD2 anti-serum 
(Cayman Chemical) or 5 μg/mL mouse monoclonal 
antibody (BioLegend). RAW 264.7 total cell lysate 
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology) was used as a positive 
control for NOD2 detection.

Statistical analysis

Data are presented as mean ± standard error of 
the mean (SEM) from, at least, three independ- 
ent experiments. Statistical analyses were per- 
formed with GraphPad Prism software version 
5.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA). 
Differences were considered statistically signifi- 
cant at P values <0.05.

Results

Cell surface receptor expression on HaCaT 
cells following stimulation with IFN-γ, IL-4, 
TNF-α, or MDP

The effect of IFN-γ, IL-4, TNF-α, and MDP on the 
phenotype of HaCaT cells was evaluated through 
the analysis of the variations in expression of a bat- 
tery of cell surface receptors after stimulation with 
the above-mentioned immunomodulators at four 
time points: 3, 24, 48, and 72 h. The employed con- 
centrations of the immunomodulators are adopted 
from previous, well-established, and optimized 
protocols.27–29 The chosen panel of receptors fall 
under three categories: adhesion, antigen presenta- 
tion, and cytokine receptors. A representative flow 
cytometry chart of the MFI for three receptors, 
before and after stimulation, is shown in Figure 1. 
In the absence of stimulation, HaCaT cells 
expressed low to moderate levels of the two adhe- 
sion receptors tested, CD49d and CD54 (ICAM-1). 
Stimulation with IL-4 notably decreased the level 
of CD49d below baseline expression, while IFN-γ,