El Darzi et al.                                                                                                                               11

demonstrated an increase in MHC I expression 
upon stimulation with IFN-γ, yet in contrast to 
what we have obtained, TNF-α on its own was not 
able to elicit a significant response.14 Upon stimu-
lation with IFN-γ, we observed an induction of 
MHC II expression. Normal human keratinocytes 
generally do not express MHC II receptor, yet 
expression could be induced, a phenomenon 
known to arise in numerous skin disorders.42 
Induction of MHC II has been accredited to IFN-γ 
released by infiltrating T cells.55 Our results relat-
ing to INF-γ are in accordance with numerous 
studies conducted on cultured keratinocytes as 
well as HaCaT cells.54–56 Similar to previous stud-
ies done on primary keratinocytes, we did not 
observe a significant effect on the expression of 
MHC II when HaCaT cells were treated with 
either TNF-α or IL-4.8,16,42,53 The functional sig-
nificance of induced MHC II receptor on keratino-
cytes following activation by IFN-γ is still unclear. 
Nevertheless, the possibility of peptide presenta-
tion by MHC II–positive keratinocytes to epitope-
specific CD4+ T cells may occur in a comparable 
fashion to that predicted MHC I–mediated activa-
tion of CD8+ T cells. 

The expression of CD1b on HaCaT cells was 
low and increased significantly at 48 and 72 h fol-
lowing stimulation with IFN-γ. CD1b is a member 
of the CD1 family of transmembrane glycopro-
teins, which are remotely related to the MHC 
receptors and are involved in presenting lipids and 
glycolipids.57 Very few studies have been con-
ducted on the expression of CD1b in keratino-
cytes. Primary keratinocytes have been shown to 
lack CD1a expression,58 similar to what we 
observed in HaCaT cells. In oral epithelium, no 
CD1b+ cells were found, while expression of 
CD1a+ keratinocytes was only present in sites of 
inflammation.59 Our detected increase in CD1b 
expression, following stimulation with IFN-γ, 
raises the possibility that presentation of lipids and 
glycolipids by keratinocytes may take place dur-
ing stages of inflammation. 

The IFN-γR/CD119 is abundantly found on both 
epidermal keratinocytes and on HaCaT cells,43,45,60 
and it is necessary for IFN-γ to exert its biological 
effects. Skin biopsies from patients with psoriasis 
maintained positive staining for the IFN-γ receptors, 
yet with altered localization.60 In our study, CD119 
was significantly downregulated by IFN-γ at 24, 48, 
and 72 h, whereas it was upregulated by TNF-α. The 
observed decrease in expression of CD119 follow-
ing stimulation with its corresponding cytokine may 
result from endocytosis of the complex or by shed-
ding of the receptor. Future studies would be 
required to validate this hypothesis. No studies have 
so far been conducted on the effect of TNF-α on 
CD119. The accompanied upregulation we observed 
could explain the synergistic effect TNF-α has been 
shown to have on IFN-γ activity. TNF-α possibly 
enhances the effect of IFN-γ to further activate 
keratinocytes through the expression of certain 
receptors, ultimately leading to a positive feedback 
of the inflammatory response. Indeed, previous 
reports have indicated that TNF-α synergizes with 
IFN-γ to enhance the expression of ICAM-1 and 
MHC I in cultured keratinocytes.8,42,48 IL-4 had no 
effect on CD119 receptor expression, which is con-
sistent with previous findings.14 

IL-4 receptors fall under two types composed of 
either IL-4Rα (CD124) associated with the com-
mon gamma chain (γc), CD132, which binds to 
IL-4, or CD124 associated with IL-13Rα1 chain 
which binds to both IL-4 and IL-13.61 We found 
that the expression of CD124 on HaCaT cells was 
not affected by IL-4, IFN-γ, or TNF-α stimulation. 
Conflicting data exists regarding the expression 
of CD124 in keratinocytes. In a study on HaCaT 
cells, both immunoblot and polymerase chain reac-
tion (PCR) analysis revealed no expression of 
CD124.62 On the contrary, a study on freshly iso-
lated and cultured keratinocytes demonstrated 
the expression of CD124 at the messenger RNA 
(mRNA) as well as the protein level.16,63,64 The low 
basal expression of CD132 on HaCaT cells was 
increased significantly after 48 h of stimulation 
with IFN-γ. While typically expressed on lympho-
cytes, keratinocytes have occasionally been found 
to express CD132,64 yet this expression is quite 
inconsistent.65,66 A study carried out on HaCaT 
cells has demonstrated their lack of CD132 expres-
sion. Moreover, HaCat cell stimulation with IL-4 
did not affect their level of CD124 expression.63 
The HaCaT response we have seen with IL-4 
regarding CD49d and CD95 expression may there-
fore be unrelated to CD124 and CD132, since both 
receptors were neither expressed nor regulated by 
IL-4. On the contrary, the significant increase in 
CD132 expression may constitute a basis for the 
previously reported synergy between IL-4 and 
IFN-γ. Combined stimulation with IL-4 and IFN-γ 
enhanced the expression of ICAM-1 and MHC II