```
Original Research Article

Differential regulation of surface receptor 
expression, proliferation, and apoptosis in 
HaCaT cells stimulated with interferon-γ, 
interleukin-4, tumor necrosis factor-α, or 
muramyl dipeptide

Emale El Darzi,¹ Samer Bazzi,² Sarah Daoud,¹ 
Karim S Echtay¹ and Georges M Bahr¹

Abstract
Keratinocytes are routinely subjected to both internal and external stimulation. This study investigates the effects of 
interferon gamma, interleukin-4, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and the synthetic immunomodulator muramyl dipeptide on 
the human keratinocyte cell line, HaCaT. Following HaCaT stimulation with cytokines or muramyl dipeptide for different 
time periods, changes in the expression of different cell surface receptors, cell proliferation, and cell apoptosis were 
evaluated by flow cytometry, tritiated thymidine uptake, and annexin-V staining, respectively. A significant decrease in the 
expression of CD49d was found upon treatment with interleukin-4. Interferon gamma and tumor necrosis factor alpha 
increased the expression of intercellular adhesion molecule 1 and major histocompatibility complex class I, whereas 
major histocompatibility complex class II and CD1b were only upregulated by interferon gamma. Interferon gamma and 
tumor necrosis factor alpha had opposite effects regarding CD11b expression, with the former downregulating, while 
the latter upregulating its expression. Of the stimuli tested, only interferon gamma and tumor necrosis factor alpha 
significantly inhibited proliferation of HaCaT cells, yet only interferon gamma played a significant role in inducing HaCaT 
cell apoptosis. Our data demonstrate differential effects of the three tested cytokines on keratinocytes and reveal that 
the absence of HaCaT cell responses to muramyl dipeptide is associated with undetectable levels of its cytoplasmic 
receptor, nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain–containing protein 2.

Keywords
apoptosis, CD molecules, cytokines, keratinocytes, muramyl dipeptide, surface receptors

Date received: 26 January 2017; accepted: 6 April 2017

Introduction
Keratinocytes comprise 95% of the cells within the 
epidermis. While once believed to function primari-
ly as a passive barrier, it has now been established 
that keratinocytes play an active and dynamic 
role in the first line of defense of an organism. 
Keratinocytes not only facilitate the immune 
response through the production and secretion of 
cytokines, chemokines, and host defense peptides

International Journal of 
Immunopathology and Pharmacology 
1–16 
© The Author(s) 2017 
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav 
DOI: 10.1177/0394632017707611 
journals.sagepub.com/home/iji

¹Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Medical 
Sciences, University of Balamand, Al Koura, Lebanon 
²Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Balamand, Al 
Kurah, Lebanon

Corresponding author:
Georges M Bahr, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine and Medical Sciences, University of Balamand, PO Box 33, 
Amioun, Al-Koura, Lebanon. 
Email: georges.bahr@balamand.edu.lb

Creative Commons Non Commercial CC BY-NC: This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which permits non-commercial 
use, reproduction and distribution of the work without further permission provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and 
Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).
```