```plaintext
22

responses, and observations from clinical studies of 
IFNγ therapy have demonstrated that IFNγ has bio-
logical effects in vivo on human AML cells [8]. In this 
context we have investigated the effects of IFNγ on the 
functional characteristics of native human AML cells. 
Our results demonstrate that IFNγ can affect prolifera-
tion, cytokine release and regulation of apoptosis for 
AML cells, and in addition IFNγ seems to inhibit the 
proliferation of various nonleukaemic cells in the AML 
microenvironment.

Even though the effects of IFNγ on native human 
AML cells have been investigated previously [9, 12–18, 
32, 33], our recent study [11] describing a possible 
prognostic impact of IFNγ-induced intracellular signal-
ing in AML cells justifies a more detailed characteri-
zation. The previous reports have several limitations. 
First, they usually include a low number of patients 
(often less than 10–15), consecutive patients are not 
examined and the criteria for selection of patients are 
not given. Secondly, the clinical and biological charac-
teristics of the selected patients are usually incomplete or 
missing. Finally, only effects on proliferation and 
membrane molecule expression have been examined, 
and the experimental models differed. These previous 
reports have generally described (1) divergent effects of 
IFNγ on AML colony formation and (2) IFNγ induc-
tion of various membrane molecules (i.e. HLA class II 
molecules, HLA-G, CD54, CD80, CD86, CD95) for 
AML cells. In the present study we therefore 
consecutive and well-characterized patients, and our 
studies included receptor expression, intracellular sig-
nalling events, cytokine release and a detailed charac-
terization of the effects on leukaemic cell proliferation 
including coculture with stromal cells.

We used well-characterized and standardized experi-
mental models with regard to culture medium and AML 
cell preparation [21–29]. Our patients represent a con-
secutive group with high peripheral blood blast counts 
so that highly enriched AML cells could be prepared 
without extensive cell separation procedures and thereby 
the risk of procedure-induced functional alterations [19]. 
We therefore emphasize that our results may be repre-
sentative only for this subset of patients, but we avoided 
further selection by investigating randomly selected or 
consecutive patient subsets.

We first investigated whether IFNγ could be released 
when T cells were activated in the presence of prolifer-
ating AML cells cocultured in direct contact with nor-
mal bone marrow stromal cells. This in vitro model will 
mimic the natural in vivo microenvironment, and we 
used an activation signal directed against the TCR/CD3 
complex to mimic antigen-specific activation. Our results 
demonstrated that T cells can be activated to release 
IFNγ when sharing the microenvironment with AML 
cells that show constitutive release of several immuno-
regulatory mediators.

CD119 expression was examined for 39 randomly 
selected patients, and AML blast expression was de-

tected for all of them and a majority showed strong 
expression with at least 70% of CD119+ cells. Thus, 
high expression of CD119 is common and independent 
of morphology (FAB classification), cytogenetic aber-
rations or genetic abnormalities of the Flt3 gene. Fur-
thermore, CD119 expression seems to be downregulated 
after in vitro exposure to IFNγ; this may be due to 
receptor internalization following receptor ligation. 
However, the majority of cells are still CD119+ even 
after the in vitro exposure.

Previous studies have demonstrated that IFNγ can 
increase AML cells expression of HLA-DR, CD40, 
CD54, CD80, CD95 and possibly CD86 [32, 33]. How-
ever, in our cocultures of AML cells and IFNγ secreting 
T cells only HLA-DR expression was increased whereas 
the expression of the immunostimulatory molecules 
CD40 and CD80 and the dendritic cell marker CD83 
was not significantly altered. The most likely explana-
tion for the difference between our present and these 
previous observations [32] is that IFNγ is only a part of a 
broad T cell cytokine response in our cocultures, and the 
IFNγ levels reached in our cultures are relatively low 
compared with the concentrations of exogenous IFNγ 
used by Costello et al. [32].

The effect of IFNγ ligation on Stat1, Stat3 and 
Erk1/2 phosphorylation status was examined. Increased 
phosphorylation was observed only for Stat1. CD119 
ligation can also induce signalling through Stat1-indep-
endent pathways, including Erk1/2 [34], but we did not 
observe any significant effect of IFNγ on the levels 
of Stat3 phosphorylation.

IFNγ did not affect spontaneous or IL3- and Flt3L-
dependent AML cell proliferation, whereas statistically 
significant inhibition was observed in the presence of 
IL1β, SCF, GM-CSF and G-CSF. Both these results 
and the coculture experiments demonstrated that the 
growth-inhibitory effect of IFNγ depends on the local 
cytokine network, and it is not a direct effect medi-
ated through reduction of IL1β or GM-CSF levels. Fi-
nally, IFNγ could also affect AML cell proliferation in 
the presence of cytarabine and idarubicin, two drugs 
that are commonly used in AML therapy [3].

We investigated the effects of IFNγ on both stress-
induced (spontaneous) and cytarabine-induced AML 
cell apoptosis, and IFNγ then had divergent effects in 
both experimental models. Thus, the divergent IFNγ 
effects represent a true biological variation.

IFNγ caused an increase in the levels of the antiangio-
genic chemokines CXCL9–11 and a slight reduction of 
proangiogenic CXCL8 levels. CXCL9 and CXCL10 
expressions are Stat1 dependent, at least in macrophages 
[10], thus the increased levels are probably caused by the 
Stat1-mediated signalling. This altered balance between 
pro- and antiangiogenic signalling may contribute to the 
inhibition of endothelial cell proliferation in the presence 
of IFNγ (see below), but it should be emphasized that 
CXCL8 was still released at relatively high levels even.

We investigated the effects of IFNγ on AML blast 
proliferation when the cells were cocultured with various
```