```plaintext
nature
immunology

ARTICLES

Control of T cell antigen reactivity via programmed
TCR downregulation

Alena M Gallegos1,3,4, Huizhong Xiong1,4, Ingrid M Leiner1, Bože Sušac1, Michael S Glickman1,2,
Eric G Pamer1,2 & Jeroen W J van Heijst1,3

The T cell antigen receptor (TCR) is unique in that its affinity for ligand is unknown before encounter and can vary by orders of
magnitude. How the immune system regulates individual T cells that display very different reactivity to antigen remains unclear.
Here we found that activated CD4+ T cells, at the peak of clonal expansion, persistently downregulated their TCR expression
in proportion to the strength of the initial antigen recognition. This programmed response increased the threshold for cytokine
production and recall proliferation in a clone-specific manner and ultimately excluded clones with the highest antigen reactivity.
Thus, programmed downregulation of TCR expression represents a negative feedback mechanism for constraining T cell effector
function with a suitable time delay to thereby allow pathogen control while avoiding excess inflammatory damage.

Efficient recognition and control of microbial infections relies on the
availability of a diverse T cell antigen receptor (TCR) repertoire1,2. In
developing T cells, TCR diversity is generated via somatic recombi-
nation, during which different gene segments are combined with the
addition and removal of nucleotides at recombination junctions. This
process results in TCRs with highly variable sequences and therefore
generates individual T cells that recognize peptide ligands with a wide
range of binding strengths (avidities). This has important functional
consequences, as high-avidity T cells are generally more sensitive to
antigen, undergo more proliferation during immune responses and
produce more cytokines3–9. However, T cells at the upper end of the
avidity spectrum can also display substantial limitations in biological
activity10–13, which suggests the existence of regulatory mechanisms
that prevent deleterious consequences of very strong antigen reac-
tivity. Hence, the optimal avidity associated with long-term T cell
functionality remains elusive, particularly in the context of immunity
to microbial infection.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis remains one of the most detrimental
human pathogens and has been challenging to combat due to the lack
of an effective vaccine14,15. Although CD4+ T cells are essential for the
control of M. tuberculosis16,17, bacterial eradication is rarely achieved.
One explanation is that M. tuberculosis is able to inhibit major histo-
compatibility complex (MHC) class II expression18,19, which results
in limited antigen presentation in mycobacterial granulomas20,21.
Therefore, one way to improve vaccination against tuberculosis might
be to engage T cells of an overall very high avidity, because these
would require less antigen to activate effector mechanisms.

To investigate how T cell avidity influences immunity to
M. tuberculosis, we generated a mouse (C24) in which CD4+ T cells
have transgenic expression of a TCR with very high avidity for the
mycobacterial antigen ESAT6(1–20). By comparing this mouse
with a previously produced mouse (C7) that expresses a TCR with
intermediate avidity for ESAT6 (refs. 22,23), we found that the
T cells of higher avidity were less able to control bacterial growth,
a phenotype that was associated with the downregulation of TCR
expression. On the basis of those results, we found that clonally
expanded T cells underwent a program of persistent TCR down-
regulation that was proportional to the strength of initial antigen
recognition. This previously unappreciated feedback mechanism
increased the threshold for cytokine production and recall pro-
liferation in an avidity-dependent manner, with the result that T
cells of intermediate avidity made the greatest contribution to anti-
microbial defense.

RESULTS
Avidity of C7 and C24 CD4+ T cells
For the investigation of CD4+ T cell immunity to tuberculosis, we
used the previously generated C7 mouse, in which all CD4+ T cells
have transgenic expression of a TCR specific for the mycobacterial
antigen ESAT6(1–20). Studies of this mouse have demonstrated that
C7 cells differentiated into the TH1 subset of CD4+ helper T cells are
able to greatly diminish but not eliminate mycobacterial growth22,23.
To determine whether that failure of bacterial eradication is a gen-
eral feature of T cell immunity, we generated another mouse with
transgenic TCR expression, using a ESAT6(1–20)-specific T cell
hybridoma (C24) obtained from an M. tuberculosis–infected C57BL/6J
mouse. We chose the C24 TCR because it uses α- and β-chains dif-
ferent from those used by the C7 TCR, which created the possibility

NATURE IMMUNOLOGY ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION 1

NATURE IMMUNOLOGY
© 2016 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.

1Immunology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. 2Infectious Diseases Service, Department of
Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. 3Present addresses: National Institute for Research in Tuberculosis, Chennai, India
(A.M.G.), and Center of Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands (J.W.J.v.H.).
4These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence should be addressed to J.W.J.v.H. (j.wanheijst@amc.uva.nl).

Received 14 September 2015; accepted 22 December 2015; published online 22 February 2016; doi:10.1038/ni.3386
```