```plaintext
ARTICLES

Figure 6 Programmed TCR downregulation
controls CD4+ T cell cytokine production.
(a,b) Flow cytometry analyzing the TCRβ
expression of C7 or C24 T cells or endogenous
(CD90.1-) CD4+ T cells among splenocytes from
mice given 1 × 106 CD90.1+ C7 or C24 T11
cells that had been activated in vitro for 4 d,
assessed on day 7 or 13 after activation
(above plots) (results normalized to the
mode) (a), and aggregate data obtained as
in a, presented relative to results obtained
for endogenous CD4+ T cells (b). (c,d) Flow
cytometry analyzing the expression of IFN-γ
by splenic C7 and C24 T11 cells obtained
from the recipient mice in a, on day 7 or 13 after
activation, then restimulated with ESAT6(1–20)
peptide or PMA plus ionomycin (P+I), and
aggregate data obtained as in c, presented
relative to results obtained for cells stimulated
with PMA plus ionomycin (d). Numbers in
outlined areas (c) indicate percent IFN-γ+ cells
(top) or IFN-γ+ cells (bottom). (e) Pearson
correlation of TCRβ expression (presented relative to results obtained for endogenous CD4+ T cells) and TCR-dependent production of IFN-γ (presented
relative to results obtained for cells stimulated with PMA plus ionomycin) by C7 and C24 T11 cells as in a, (r = 0.98). Each symbol (b,d,e) represents
an individual mouse. Horizontal lines indicate the geometric mean. NS, not significant (P > 0.05); *P = 0.003 and **P < 0.001 (unpaired two-
tailed Student’s t test). Data are from one experiment representative of two independent experiments.

the downregulation during acute infection with L. monocytogenes
(Supplementary Fig. 5). Furthermore, endogenous M. tuberculosis–
specific CD4+ T cells also displayed downregulation of TCR expression,
which was not affected by the ESAT6(1–20) tetramer displayed lower
TCR expression than cells that bound the tetramer and the tetramer
confounded by TCR downregulation. Together these data established
that activated CD4+ T cells displayed a program of persistent down-
regulation of TCR expression that was initiated at the peak of clonal
expansion and resulted in a repertoire with graded TCR expression,
which C7 T cells and C24 T cells represented an average example
and an extreme example, respectively.

Programmed TCR downregulation linked to TCRβ degradation
Given that the α- and β-chains of C7 and C24 TCRs were driven by
a constitutive promoter, we hypothesized that the downregulation
of TCR expression was regulated by other components of the TCR
complex. Activated C24 T cells with almost completely absent surface
TCR expression had attenuated transcription of the TCR complex
components CD3γ, CD3δ, CD3ε and TCRζ (Supplementary Fig. 6),
which suggested that downregulation of the TCR was mediated via
post-transcriptional mechanisms. Assembly of the TCR complex is
generally limited by the availability of TCRζ33, and transient downregu-
lation of TCR surface expression can be mediated via degradation of
TCRζ34–36. This prompted us to investigate the expression of TCRζ
protein in CD4+ T cells activated by L. monocytogenes as before,
C7 and C24 T cells, as well as endogenous activated CD4+ T cells,
displayed graded and persistent downregulation of TCR expression,
starting at the peak of clonal expansion (Fig. 5a–d). Notably, total
expression of TCRζ demonstrated a pattern of downregulation mark-
edly similar to that of surface expression of TCRβ (Fig. 5e), which
suggested that programmed TCR downregulation was mediated via
degradation of TCRζ.

Programmed TCR downregulation controls antigen reactivity
TCR expression is critical for an efficient response to antigenic
stimulation37–39. To investigate to what extent programmed

TCR downregulation influences the antigen reactivity of activated
T cells, we transferred C7 or C24 T11 cells into uninfected
mice. This generated a setting in which both T11 clones had high
TCR expression initially (day 7 after activation), whereas later
(on day 13), TCR expression was downregulated on C7 T11 cells
but low on C24 T11 cells (Fig. 6a,b). To functionally test the
consequences of programmed TCR downregulation, we restimu-
lated the cells with ESAT6(1–20) peptide, to investigate
the TCR-dependent and -independent cytokine production. As a
control, we incubated the same cells with the phorbol ester PMA
plus ionomycin, which allows measurement of the TCR-independent
capacity for cytokine production. On day 7, TCR-dependent
production of interferon-γ (IFN-γ) by C7 and C24 T11 cells was
equal to their TCR-independent production of IFN-γ (Fig. 6c,d),
which indicated that when TCR expression was high, the antigen
reactivity of both clones was similar. In contrast, on day 13, the
TCR-dependent production of IFN-γ by C7 T11 cells was interme-
diate and that of C24 T11 cells was low, which resulted in a very
strong correlation between TCR expression and TCR-dependent
production of IFN-γ (Fig. 6c–e). Notably, the TCR-independent
production of IFN-γ by both clones was very high on day 13
(Fig. 6c), which indicated that following TCR downregulation,
the T cells continued to have a large intrinsic capacity to produce
cytokines; however, their cytokine production in response to antigen
was drastically altered.

Since programmed TCR downregulation was initiated at the
peak of clonal expansion and persisted for at least 50 d, we reasoned this
might have a substantial effect on participation in secondary immune
responses. To address this, we infected recipients of naive C7 or C24
T cells with L. monocytogenes–ESAT6 and rechallenged these mice 1
month later. As before, the primary clonal expansion of C7 and C24
T cells was similar, and TCR expression on both clones was initially
high, whereas by day 27, it was intermediate on C7 T cells and very
low on C24 T cells (Fig. 7). Strikingly, rechallenge on day 28 resulted
in an increase in the frequency of C7 T cells of >500% by day 33,
whereas there was a decrease of 50% in the frequency of C24 T cells,
which indicated that these cells were not able to participate in the
secondary response.

NATURE IMMUNOLOGY ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION 5
```