The programmed cell death protein-1 (PD1) is one of those 
key factors [5]. Normally in an immune response, PD1 and its 
ligand PDL1 function as an immune checkpoint pathway to 
maintain tolerance to ‘self’ material and prevent excessive 
immune activities. Nonetheless, under protracted immune 
stress, PDL1 expression can be induced on cancer cells and 
other cells in the tumour microenvironment (TME), sup- 
pressing the host’s anti-tumour immunity in many cancers such 
as melanoma and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). 
Recent research into immuno-oncology has been focusing on 
modulating those regulatory factors of the immune system in 
hope of unleashing the natural power of anti-tumour 
immune response to treat a wide spectrum of cancers with 
less adverse effects and long-lasting memory. Immune check- 
point inhibitors, a new class of therapeutic agents, have been 
developed or are currently under development based on this 
principle [6]. These are typically monoclonal antibodies specifi- 
cally targeting checkpoint proteins including PD1, PDL1, 
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 and many 
others. In clinical trials, therapies employing these agents 
have exhibited durable responses and improved survival 
of patients across a range of cancers including advanced mela- 
noma, NSCLC and bladder cancer, and have thus been granted 
regulatory approval from the Food and Drug Administration 
for those indications [7–9]. 

However, unaddressed issues remain that limit a wider 
and more effective application of immunotherapies. First, 
although patients who respond to anti-PD1 showed significant 
tumour reduction and improved progression-free survival, the 
response rate is relatively low, e.g. about 30–40% in advanced 
melanoma and 20% in NSCLC [10]. In order to identify 
patients that will most likely benefit from such therapies, it is 
important to establish reliable predictive biomarkers along 
with the treatment strategy, and pathologists are trying to 
further deduce the implication of spatial characteristics such 
as intratumoural heterogeneity and immuno-architectures 
[11,12]. Second, the immune activity is regulated by a complex 
network of signalling pathways involving many more poten- 
tial therapeutic targets [6]. Without better understanding 
of how the network functions as a whole in a quantitative 
manner, it is difficult to predict the comprehensive outcome 
of targeting one of these immune checkpoint proteins, or 
their combinations. In addition, other different types of 
cancer treatments may be synergistic when combined with 
immune checkpoint inhibitors, such as radiotherapy, che- 
motherapy and other immunotherapies including chemokine 
therapy, adaptive cell transfer and cancer vaccines [13,14]. 
However, due to the vast number of possible combinations, it 
is necessary to screen for the ones that are most likely to be 
effective so that limited resources can be focused on those. 
Without such predicting power, development of immune 
checkpoint inhibitors and their combinational therapies is lar- 
gely a trial-and-error process, and findings in model animals 
may be difficult to translate well to human subjects [15]. To 
address the aforementioned problems and further exploit the 
potential of immune checkpoint inhibitors, it is essential to 
put together a knowledge base of how the immunotherapies 
mechanistically modulate the complex interactions between 
tumour development and anti-tumour immune response. 
This knowledge base should then allow us to make quantitat- 
ive predictions of the differential efficacy of an immunotherapy 
in a heterogeneous population, as well as in combination with 
other therapeutic agents. 

A computational multiscale hybrid model suits this task. 
Mechanistic dynamical systems models described by ordinary 
differential equations (ODE) have been developed to under- 
stand the dynamics of cancer and immune cells in various 
situations, including immunotherapy [16–25] (reviewed in 
[26,27]). However, these models lack the spatial resolution 
that would allow one to examine intratumoural hetero- 
geneity and their correlation with treatment efficacy. Recently, 
intratumoural heterogeneity has become centre stage for under- 
standing such important aspects of cancer treatment as drug 
resistance and biomarkers [28,29]. Agent-based models (ABM) 
are often employed to capture the spatial aspect of the system. 
This type of model usually operates on a lattice, where cellular 
‘agents’ interact locally with each other according to a defined 
set of experiment-based rules reflecting their biological roles, 
and collectively generates a global emergent behaviour. ABM 
have been used to study many different aspects of cancer, 
including tumour growth, cancer cell migration, metabolism, 
evolutionary dynamics, metastasis, angiogenesis and the role 
of cancer stem cells [30–39]. In particular, Castiglione et al. 
extended a previously developed immune simulator to model 
cancer–immune interactions, which generated insights into 
cancer vaccine development [40,41]. Off-lattice ABM are often 
used when forces between cells or cells and the extracellular 
matrix play important roles, or change of cell size and mor- 
phology need to be accounted for [42–44]. ABM can also 
serve as the backbone of a hybrid multiscale model by providing 
a scaffold to interface with other model types to study tumour 
growth dynamics. Wang et al. combined a tumour growth 
ABM with mechanistic model described by ODE capturing 
intracellular signalling pathway of epidermal growth factor 
and transforming growth factor-β, as well as partial differential 
equation (PDE)-based models describing the diffusion of these 
chemical substances along with oxygen and glucose [45]. Such 
scheme is also used in cancer progression models with an 
immune component, where nutrients for survival and prolifer- 
ation [46] or an immune reagent [47] are captured as PDE and 
coupled with the cancer growth ABM. 

In this study, we present a computational multiscale agent- 
based model capturing spatially explicit dynamics of tumour 
development in the presence of adaptive immune response. 
By varying components of patient tumour neoantigen charac- 
teristics such as mutational burden and antigen strength, our 
simulations reproduce a variety of spatial patterns of PDL1 
expression resembling immuno-architecture found in patient 
biopsies. We also demonstrate, as a proof of principle, how 
the model could allow us to predict a scoring system that 
takes into account not only the relative amount but also the 
spatial distribution of PDL1+ cancer cells and discerns patients 
that are likely to respond to anti-PDL1 treatment. The model can 
be expanded to reflect specific types of cancer to enable quanti- 
tative predictions of therapy–biomarker combinations and to be 
used as a platform for conducting virtual clinical trials. 

2. Material and methods 
2.1. Hybrid multiscale systems immuno-oncology 
model 
We developed a multi-compartment multiscale model to capture 
dynamics of biological processes involved in tumour development 
and anti-tumour immune response. In this model, we included 
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CD8+ T cells) and cancer cells, which