```plaintext
Downloaded from http://rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on September 20, 2017

7

rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org J. R. Soc. Interface 14: 20170220

low mutational burden

high mutational burden

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

PDL1− w/o blocker
PDL1− w/ blocker
PDL1+ w/o blocker
PDL1+ w/ blocker

cancer cell count

cancer cell count

cancer cell count

cancer cell count

high antigen strength

low antigen strength

time (day)

time (day)

Figure 5. Responses to PD1/PDL1 checkpoint blockade among simulated tumours. Solid line: no treatment. Dotted line: anti-PDL1 treatment is simulated by
reducing cytotoxic T-cell suppression from PDL1+ cancer cells by half from day 30 onward. Time courses of PDL1 positive and negative cancer cell counts are
shown for tumours from patients with (a) tumour neoantigens of low mutational burden and high antigen strength; (b) high mutational burden and high antigen
strength; (c) low mutational burden and low antigen strength; (d) high mutational burden and low antigen strength.

regardless of tumour antigen strength. The number of PDL1−
cancer cells is smaller than in the cases where treatment is not
given, but still increases nevertheless. The number of PDL1+
cancer cells is even higher than in no-treatment cases, possibly
induced by a more inflammatory TME resulting from reduced
suppression of cytotoxic T cells. In high mutational burden
scenarios, despite a brief initial increase of PDL1+ cells, cancer
cell counts begin to decline after treatment is applied after
day 30. Furthermore, in high mutational burden cases, the
rate of tumour size reduction is affected by antigen strength.
With high antigen strength, the tumour is eliminated before
the end of simulation (figure 5c), while the reduction is less
dramatic in the low antigen strength case (figure 5d).

3.4. Scoring simulated tumour immuno-architecture as
a potential biomarker for anti-PDL1 treatment
efficacy
Comparing the results in figures 4 and 5, we find that apparent
visual similarities may not be indicative of similar prognosis for
immune checkpoint blockade treatment. In figure 4a,d, both
tumours appear to have similar sizes and both have PDL1+
cancer cells similarly distributed in the tumour. However, the

treatment outcome is very different (figure 5a,d). We use the
model to demonstrate how simulated tumour cross sections
can be analysed to assess potential predictive biomarkers.

Following the ideas of exploratory scoring systems pro-
posed by pathologists [11,12], we focus on the rim of the
tumour, which is defined as the region consisting of points
within a specified distance from the tumour surface
(figure 6a). The distance threshold can be varied in future ana-
lyses to optimize the power of the predictive biomarker. For
each simulated tumour, three cross sections are taken, perpen-
dicular to the x-, y- or z-axis, and all three go through the centre
of the lattice. Euclidian distance to surface is calculated, and for
each cross section a score is calculated as the fraction of cancer
cells in the rim region that are PDL1 positive. We calculated the
ratios of tumour sizes at day 50 (20 days post-treatment) and
day 30 (pretreatment) as a measurement of tumour shrinkage
(1: equilibrium; 0: elimination; >1: progression) (figure 6b). The
scoring results using a threshold distance of 50 μm are shown
in figure 6c.

To assess how the width of evaluated rim affects predictive
power of score, we examined a series of threshold distances
for regionalization and calculated the receiver operating charac-
teristic (ROC) curve (figure 6d). Results indicate that when
```