```plaintext
Downloaded from http://rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on September 20, 2017

                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                           rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org
                                                                                                           J. R. Soc. Interface 14: 20170320

(a) 1.0
    total cancer cells

 0.5

   0

−0.5

       IL2th      pmt       pmc       pkn       pkp       pn2p

(b) 0.6
    ratio of PDL1+ cancer cell to total cancer cell counts

 0.4

 0.2

   0

−0.2

−0.4

−0.6
       IL2th      pmt       pmc       pkn       pkp       pn2p

Figure 9. Partial rank correlation coefficients of indicated parameters (for parameter definitions see electronic supplementary material, table S1) and cancer cell count (a) or
ratio of PDL1+ cancer cell to total cancer cell counts (b). Significant correlations are marked with asterisks (α = 1 × 10−9). (Online version in colour.)

meaning an increase in ability of highly mobile CD8+ T cells to
limit tumour growth. The velocities of cancer cells vary in a
wide range (0.01–5 μm min−1) depending on cancer types,
stages of progression and migration modes [58]. In this
study, we are focusing on the lower end of the spectrum cor-
responding to properties found in the early stage of tumour
development. At this stage, cancer cell mobility is positively
correlated with tumour size, indicating cancer cell migration
promotes tumour progression. The negative correlation
between tumour size and rate of cytotoxic T cells killing both
PDL1+ and PDL1− cancer cells is also in accordance with the
role of anti-tumour T cells in limiting cancer growth. The
higher correlation of the killing rate of PDL1+ than that of
PDL1− also suggests the importance of a higher PDL1+
cancer cells’ overall contribution to tumour progression. This
will help us assess their correlation with treatment efficacy
and thus potential as target of clinical intervention. PDL1
induction in cancer cells also correlates positively with
tumour size. This indicates that the resistance build-up
from the inflammatory environment not only prevents a
tumour from been eliminated by the immune system but also
contributes to its progression.

Furthermore, some mechanisms are correlated with both
total cancer cell count and PDL1+ fractions, but in opposite
directions. A high proportion of PDL1+ expression in tumours
is usually considered to suggest high probability of patient

responding to anti-PD1/anti-PDL1 treatment, and thus mech-
anisms that correlate negatively with tumour size and
positively correlate with PDL1+ expression might be helpful
to couple with such treatment to improve outcome. From
figure 9b, it can be seen that IL-2 threshold belongs in such cat-
egory, meaning sensitizing T cells to IL-2 may synergize with the
therapy. Alternatively, mechanisms negatively correlated with
tumour size and positively correlated with PDL1+ fraction,
such as T-cell motility, can be induced to help with the therapy.
On the contrary, targeting mechanisms such as cancer cell PDL1
induction probability might not be fruitful because although
increasing it can promote PDL1 fraction, it also promotes overall
cancer growth, leaving the overall effect difficult to predict.

4. Discussion
In this study, we developed a three-dimensional agent-based
systems immuno-oncology model to simulate the interaction
between cancer cells and CD8+ T cells specific to cancer anti-
gen. The inputs of each simulation to capture individual
variance are parameters governing the tumour mutational
burden and antigen strength. Two important model outputs
are assessed. First, the emergent spatial patterns of different
cell types from our simulations without treatment, which
resemble patterns observed in patients’ biopsies. Second, the
```