```plaintext
biological knowledge and use global sensitivity analysis to study 
how biological mechanisms affect simulation outputs.

In sensitivity analysis, we determine the list of parameters 
of interest and specify a range of values for each parameter 
(electronic supplementary material, table S1). We use Latin hyper-
cube sampling (LHS) [49] to generate the parameter value 
combinations to achieve high accuracy with a smaller number of 
samples. In this study, 5000 experiments are generated, with each 
experiment simulated using one parameter combination from the 
matrix, and replicated three times to reduce uncertainty from 
inherent stochastic variations. Partial rank correlation coefficients 
(PRCC) are calculated between all pairs of target model output 
and parameters varied in the LHS in order to assess parameter 
global sensitivity and detect monotonic relationship between 
mechanisms and functionalities [50].

3. Results

3.1. Tumour development in the presence of adaptive 
immune response

We first attempted to establish a baseline scenario where a cancer 
cell develops into a tumour with relatively stable size while inter-
acting with T cells generated from an immune response induced 
by cancer progression. Note that here we do not focus on the 
effects of cancer stem and progenitor cells on tumour growth; 
these issues are addressed by numerous computational studies, 
e.g. [37,51]. In addition to the spatial distribution of different cell 
types at a given time point (figure 2a), our model produces 
output data of various forms for further evaluation and 
interpretation. Global characteristics such as number of cells of 
different subtypes (effector, active cytotoxic and suppressed T 
cells, PDL1+, PDL1− cancer cells) are recorded (figure 2b). 
After primed in the lymph node, tumour neoantigen-specific 
naive T cells differentiate into effector T cells, which can be 
recruited to tumour. These effector cells begin to exert their cyto-
toxic activity upon recognizing their antigen target in the TME. 
As shown in these figures, T cells start to arrive at the tumour site 
around day 10, quickly accumulate while cancer cell prolifera-
tion slows down from exponential growth. This is followed 
by the appearance of PDL1+ cancer cells induced by the inflam-
matory microenvironment. The number of effector T cells falls 
after initial growth, leaving behind a mixture of actively cyto-
toxic and suppressed T cells, and PDL1 positive and negative 
cancer cells. Molecular scale data are recorded in both space 
and time. In figure 2c, the concentrations of IL-2 at specified 
time points are visualized, and can be seen to evolve along 
with tumour progression. To look more closely at how these 
different subtypes of cells are distributed in space and time, 
we present slices of the simulated tumour at a series of time 
points. Each cell subtype is shown with different colours 
(figure 2d), mimicking multiple immunohistochemistry slides 
from patient samples [10,52,53]. From these figures, we can dis-
cern a immune front formed between immune cells and cancer, 
with PDL1 positive cancer cells and PD1 positive T cells cluster-
ing at the interface; however, patches of these cells also appear 
inside the tumour. Parameter values for tumour development 
baseline are listed in electronic supplementary material, 
table S1. Ten replications are performed for the simulations in 
this case. It should be noted that these simulations illustrate 
the power and capabilities of the model platform and the par-
ameters or their ranges should be selected for specific cancer 
type; this includes the rate of tumour growth that could be 
much slower than the above example for some cancer types.

3.2. Simulated tumours display a range of histological 
patterns resembling immunohistochemistry data 
from patient biopsies

Patterns in figure 2d represent only one of the many different 
types of patterns seen in patients’ biopsies. Next, we qualitatively 
validate the model by producing a collection of tumours with a 
range of patterns with cell type distribution resembling those 
seen in patients [54–56]. We hypothesize that the patterns can 
be affected by each individual’s tumour neoantigen profile. In 
our ABM, tumour neoantigen profile is characterized by two fac-
tors: mutational burden (kn) and antigen strength (ki). These two 
factors together determine effector recruitment rate in the model 
(see Material and methods section for details). We simulated 
tumour development in patients with the following tumour 
neoantigen characteristics combinations: high (kn = 20) or 
low (kn = 10) mutational burden, with high (ki = 0.1) or low 
(ki = 0.001) antigen strength. Three-dimensional visualizations 
of tumour at day 30 are shown in figure 3. To better relate our 
simulation to patient biopsies, available to pathologists, we 
took snapshots of pretreatment tumours also at day 30 (figure 4).

We find that different patterns of PDL1+ cancer cells 
emerge from these settings, qualitatively similar to those seen 
in patients [52,53]. In cases with low mutational burden 
(figure 4a,c), PDL1+ cancer cells can be seen sporadically 
distributed within the tumour, and PDL1+ cancer cells are 
seen more frequently in high antigen strength case than in 
low antigen strength case. When mutational burden is high, 
PDL1+ expression is observed in patchy patterns (figure 4d). 
When antigen strength is also high a clearer immune front is 
observed, as a PDL1+ cuff forms to envelope the tumour. The 
spatial characteristics (immuno-architecture) have potential 
traits of predictive power of treatment outcomes when 
quantified [57], which we will further examine in §3.4.

To make the simulations more tractable, the lattice we use to 
simulate tumour development is 1 mm3 in size (i.e. 1000 
voxels), which is smaller than actual vascularized tumours; 
the region could be considered as representative of sub-regions 
of larger tumours. Electronic supplementary material, figure S1, 
shows that when larger lattice is used (2 × 2 × 2 mm or 8 million 
voxels), the overall patterns are similar to those obtained from 
smaller lattices. While the model does not place limitations on 
tumour size, the implementation could be limited by the 
size of the computer RAM, or would be slowed down when 
the size exceeds a certain computer-specific limit. However, 
different solutions could be found to circumvent this problem, 
e.g. considering sample volumes of the tumour.

3.3. Responsiveness to anti-PDL1 treatment is affected 
by patient neoantigen characteristics

In a recent study conducted among a colorectal cancer cohort, 
the mutational burden of patients is found to correlate with 
response to immune checkpoint blockade treatment [56]. In 
our next simulation experiments, we attempted to verify with 
our model reproduce such phenomenon and further predicts 
which of the two factors, mutational burden versus antigen 
strength, of a patient’s tumour neoantigen profile more strongly 
influences the responsiveness of the patient to immune check-
point inhibitor treatment. Here we assume that all tumour 
cells are equally affected by the treatment, and simulated anti-
PDL1 treatment by reducing the parameter value governing 
the probability of a PDL1+ cancer cell suppressing a cytotoxic 
```