```plaintext
ARTICLES                                                                                     NATURE CANCER

tumor cells remains a possibility. Of note, exposure of OVCARS8 
tumor cells to IFN-γ does not induce an increase in Ifng transcript 
levels (data not shown), ruling out a feed-forward loop as an under-
lying mechanism for the observed signal spreading.

With respect to the functional consequences of the observed 
IFN-γ sensing, we would like to highlight three things. First, the 
current data strongly indicate that while further resistance of tumor 
cells through IFN-γ-driven expression of inhibitory molecules such 
as PD-L1, TNFRSF14 and Galectin-9 (ref. 4) can occur well before 
the actual arrival of CD8+ T cells in a tumor substructure. Second, 
for those tumors that are sensitive to IFN-γ-mediated killing, 
growth arrest or senescence, the observed bystander IFN-γ sensing 
may be considered a fail-safe mechanism in case of antigen loss. In 
other words, tumor cells that have lost relevant antigens, and are 
therefore invisible to T cells, may still be cleared by means of ‘back-
up’ cytokine secretion by tumor-specific T cells. Third, besides act-
ing on tumor cells, the widespread effects of IFN-γ can be expected 
to influence other cell types present in the TME, such as the T cells 
themselves, potentially inducing apoptosis of activated tumor-anti-
gen-specific T cells once they express high levels of the IFN-γR1. In 
conclusion, the ultimate outcome of the observed tumor IFN-γ 
sensing will be determined by factors such as the antigen-presen-
tation potential, expression of inhibitory molecules and immune 
infiltrate of individual tumors5, and inhibition of this sensing could 
be attractive in certain settings. From a more conceptual point of 
view, this work underscores the need for the cognitive and che-
mokine output of tumor-antigen-specific CD8+ T cells6–8, it will 
be of interest to understand the relative contribution of not only 
IFN-γ, TNF-α and CXCL13, but also to understand how the joint 
expression of these molecules collectively modulates the TME on spon-

psPAX (Addgene, catalog no. 12260) and pMD2.G (Addgene, no. 12259) 
(3 μg each) using X-tremeGENE (Roche), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. 
Then, 2–3 d after transfection, the supernatant was harvested, filtered through 
a filter with a 0.45-μm filter and added to OVCARS or MDA-MB-231 cells at 
1:1 medium:viral supernatant ratio. Agp-GFP+ OVCARS and MDA-MB-231 cells 
were generated by retroviral transduction with the pQCXIX-MCS1-GFP vector 
(see ‘IGS reporter generation and viral vectors’). Agp-GFP cells were generated by 
retroviral transduction with the pMX-IRES-GFP vector (see ‘IGS reporter generation 
and viral vectors’). After transduction, indicated cell populations were sorted on 
a FACSAria Fusion (BD Biosciences) to >90% purity. Agp-GFP TCR cells were 
were subsequently generated by lentiviral transduction of Agp-GFP cells with 
IGS reporter virus (see ‘IGS reporter generation and viral vectors’), followed by 
selection of the transduced cells in the presence of 2 μg ml–1 of puromycin (Sigma). 
Agp-CFP-Luc+ and Agp-CFP-Ifn-γR–/– Luc+ cells were generated by lentiviral 
transduction of Agp-CFP cells or Agp-CFP-Ifn-γR–/– with the pLKO-luciferase 
vector (see ‘IGS reporter generation and viral vectors’).

Generation of knockout cell lines. Ag CFP-Ifn-γR–/– cells, Ag CFP-HLA-A–/– 
cells and Ag CFP-Ifn-γR–/– HLA-A–/– cells were generated using the 
CRISPR–Cas9 system, by transfection of cells with a guideRNA CRISPR v2 
(Addgene, catalog no. 52961) encoding the single guide RNA sequence 
AAATGCAACAGTACATGATGTTT (Ifn-γR1) or GGACCAAGGAGATGCCAGCAGC 
(HLA-A), using X-tremeGENE (Roche), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. 
Then 48 h after transfection, cells were selected with 2 μg ml–1 of puromycin 
(Sigma) for 1 wk, and cells negative for Ifn-γR1/HLA-A/B/C were isolated on a 
FACSAria Fusion (BD Biosciences) to >90% purity. Ag CFP-Ifn-γR–/– IGS 
reporter cells were generated by transduction of Ag CFP-Ifn-γR–/– cells with 
the IGS reporter virus (see ‘IGS reporter generation and viral vectors’). To distinguish 
between IFN-γR-proficient and IFN-γR-deficient cells, IFN-γR-deficient tumor 
cells were subsequently transduced with the pQCXIX-MCS1-GFP vector and 
cell sorting.

T cell culture and T cell transductions. Retroviral transduction of T cells was 
performed as described previously. Briefly, Phoenix packaging cells were plated 
to be 90% confluent at 0.5 × 106 cells per well. After 24 h, cells were transfected 
with 3 μg pMP71-CD8α, TCR, MART-1, CDK4R, K-ras, or pMIG-Ifn-γR1 using 
X-tremeGENE (Roche), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After 48 h, 
virus-containing supernatants were collected and centrifuged to remove cellular 
debris. Supernatants were subsequently transferred to Retronectin (Takara)- 
coated plates, and plates were centrifuged at 3,000g for 90 min at 4 °C. 
After centrifugation, virus supernatants were removed and replaced with 5 × 106 
activated CD8+ T cells per well, and plates were supplemented with 40 IU ml–1 of 
IL-2 (Proleukin, Novartis). After 72 h, cells were stained with anti-CD8 (used 
for the mouse TCR) constant domain this present in all TCR sequences (used to 
detect Ifn-γR1). Transduction efficiency was determined by measuring the 
percentage of T cells were frozen down in FBS supplemented medium and 
cytokines every 3–4 d until used in assays or cryopreservation. After 
cryopreservation, transduced CD8+ T cells were thawed and rested for 1 d in 
50:50 medium supplemented with 600 IU ml–1 of IL-2 at 37 °C/5% CO2 before 
re-stimulation.

In vitro characterization of IGS reporter cells and T cell-mediated tumor cell 
killing. Agp-GFP IGS reporter tumor cells proficient or deficient for the IFN-γR 
were plated at 20,000 cells per well in 48-well plates and exposed to indicated 
concentrations of either human IFN-α (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or human IFN-γ 
(Invitrogen) and the indicated timepoints, cells were harvested, stained with Dcp 
(Invitrogen) for 1 h at 4 °C, and analyzed by flow cytometry. To measure T-cell-mediated death 
of bystander tumor cells, a mixture of Agp-GFP+, CFP+ Agp IFN-γR-proficient and 
CFP+ Agp IFN-γR-deficient OVCARS cells was plated at 20,000 cells per well 
in 48-well plates at a 2:1 ratio and cells were then incubated with either HBS 
balanced salt solution (HBSS; Gibco) or CD4/CD8-specific T cells in HBSS at 
a 5:1 ratio of (total) tumor cell number. Cells and total cell counts were analyzed 
24 h after co-culturing by IR-Dye staining and subsequent flow cytometry using 
AccuCount Blank 15.2-μm beads (Spherotech).

LCK inhibitor experiments. Isolated CD8+ T cells from peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (see ‘T cell culture and T cell transductions’) were activated in 
96-well plates coated with 5 μg ml–1 of plate-bound Ultra-LefA1 anti-CD3 antibody 
(OKT3, Biolegend) and 2 μg ml–1 of plate-bound Ultra-LefA1 anti-CD28 antibody 
(CD28.2, Biolegend) at a density of 1 × 106 cells per well, in a 1:1 mix of Aim 5 
(Gibco) and RPMI medium (Gibco), supplemented with 40% AB serum (Life 

                                                                                     NATURE CANCER | www.nature.com/natcancer
```