```
NATURE CANCER

ARTICLES

Technologies), 100 U ml–1 of penicillin (Roche) and 100 μg ml–1 of streptomycin
(Roche). After 24 h, cells were either left untreated or treated with 5 nM LCK
inhibitor (Merck Millipore) for the indicated time periods. Cells were then
washed three times with medium to remove already secreted IFN-γ, and cells
were cultured for 30 h in 40 μl fresh conditioned medium or medium containing
5 nM LCK inhibitor. Subsequently, supernatants were collected and IFN-γ
concentrations were determined using the BD Cytometric Bead Array Human
Th1/Th2/Th17 Cytokine Kit, according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

Mice. NOD scid IL2rγnull22m/m mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratories.
All animal experiments were approved by the Animal Welfare Committee of
the Netherlands Cancer Institute (NKI), in accordance with national guidelines.
All animals were maintained in the animal department of the NKI, housed in
individually ventilated cage systems under specific-pathogen-free conditions, and
received food and water freely. Mice were used at 8–26 weeks of age.

In vivo tumor experiments. Mixed tumors, OVCAR5 cells, 8 × 106, or MDA-
MB-231 cells, 5 × 106, were injected subcutaneously into the flank of NSG-P2m–/–
mice on BD HSBS and 50 μg Matrigel (Corning), using indicated mixtures of
tumor cell variants.

Segmented tumors. First the major contributing cell population was injected
subcutaneously into the flank of NSG-P2m–/– mice in BD HSBS plus 50 μl
Matrigel. Subsequently, mice were placed on a 37 °C heating pad for 15 min, while
the tumor cells and the 2% isoflurane (Pharmachemie BV) for isoflurane mixture.
The minor cell compartment was then injected into the solidified agar together
with BD HSBS plus 10 μl Matrigel, using a Veo Insulin syringe with a BD Ultra-Fine
6-mm × 31G needle. Indicated mixtures of tumor variants were injected, and
up to a total of 8 × 106 tumor cells per tumor site.

Mixed tumors for intravital imaging. First, a mammary imaging window was
surgically inserted into the flank of female mice under aseptic conditions, on top
of the fourth mammary gland (for more details, see ref. 1). Subsequently, 8 × 106
tumor cells were injected into the fat pad of the fourth mammary gland. Tumor
animals were sedated with a 2% isoflurane/compressed air mixture, 30 min after
tumor cell injection; mice were maintained hyperthermic (0.01 mg kg–1
buprenorphine) and were imaged after subcutaneous injection of 0.1 mg kg–1
buprenorphine. Mice were imaged using a customized imaging box on the
microscope while being kept under constant anesthesia, with the imaging box and
the microscope adjusted to 34.5 °C using a humid chamber. After each imaging
session, mice were kept at 37 °C until they had fully recovered from anesthesia.
Intravital images were acquired using an inverted Leica SP5 DIVE system with a
MaiTai eHP DeepSee laser (Spectra-Physics) and Insight X3 (Spectra-Physics).
Three-dimensional (3D) tile scans of the full visible tumor area were acquired
with 10 μm Z-steps. The microscope was equipped with 4 HyD-RLD detectors:
(1) GFP and mOrange2 were simultaneously excited at 819 nm (MaiTai eHP
DeepSee) and 1,040 nm (Insight X3) and detected at 454–618 nm for GFP and
562–585 nm for mOrange2, together with second harmonic generation (collagen
(fibrosis)) at 406–416 nm. In a second sequential scan, GFP and Katshuka were
simultaneously excited at 960 nm (MaiTai eHP DeepSee) and 1,191 nm (Insight
X3) and detected at 491–598 nm for GFP and 619–683 nm for Katshuka. All
images were collected at 1,024 × 1,024 and acquired with a ×25 water immersion
objective with a free working distance of 2.40 mm (HCX FLUOTAR L 25×/0.95W
VISIR 0.17).

Post-processing and analysis of intravital microscopy data. For analysis, 3D
tile scans acquired by intravital microscopy were imported in Imaris (Bitplane)
software. To analyze cells, 3D binary images were created from the GFP (that is,
Ag’), CFP (that is, Ag’) and Katshuka (that is, IGS) reporter channels based on a
threshold that was optimized for each timepoint, channel and experiment, and
split into cells with a diameter of 12.2 μm. Autofluorescent signal, that was not
cell channel was excluded from analysis. For each signal, the total volume (as a
measure of the number of cells) was determined in the ROI at a distance of 50 μm
from the Katshuka+ CFP channel. The distance to the nearest Ag’ neighbors was
calculated using the distance transformation and intensity center of Ag’ and
neighbor cells.

Staining and analysis of segmented tumors. Tumors were isolated from mice
and placed between two coverslips. From these freshly isolated tumors, 3D tile
scans were acquired by intravital microscopy (without image-based sampling as
described in multivariable intravital microscopy). Using a custom-made ImageJ
v1.52i macro (available on request), the number of Orange2+ and Katshuka+
cells was determined from the GFP (that is, Ag’) and GFP (that is, Ag’) channels
based on a threshold that was optimized for each timepoint, channel and
experiment, and split into cells with a diameter of 12.2 μm. The number of
Orange2+ T cells was quantified in 3D tile scans (500 × 500 × 100 μm3) in the
Ag’ and Ag’ areas of segmented tumors by manually counting using ImageJ
v1.52i. The number of tumor cells was estimated by dividing the tumor volume
by the volume of a spherical tumor cell. The average volume of spherical tumor
cells was determined by measuring the diameter of 50 cancer cells, yielding a
volume of 24 μm3.

Human tumor immunohistochemistry. Human tumor tissue was obtained
from 51 patients (no data on specific patient characteristics) in accordance with
national guidelines, following opt-out procedure and approved by the local
medical ethical committee (institutional review board of the NKI, Antoni van
Leeuwenhoek Hospital). Tumor tissue was collected from surgical specimens
after macroscopic examination of the tissue by a pathologist. For each specimen,
a fragment was formalin fixed and paraffin-embedded for histology. Then, 3-μm
sections were cut from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor material and
slides were stained with anti-P2m (polyclonal, DAKO/Agilent) or anti-CD8
(clone C8/144B, DAKO/Agilent) antibodies. Slides were counterstained with
hematoxylin and Bliang reagent (Ventana Medical Systems). All slides were
scanned with an Aperio Scanscope, uploaded on Slide Score (https://www.slidescore.com) and
manually assessed for P2m and CD8 expression.

Statistics and reproducibility. All repeated independent experiments showed
similar results. Statistical analysis was performed in Prism 9 (GraphPad). Two-
tailed Mann–Whitney U-tests and a two-tailed, paired t-test with normally
distributed data. For all boxplots, center line represents the median, box limits
represent upper and lower quartiles, and whiskers represent minimum and
maximum values. No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample sizes. In
the analysis of Fig. 4f, areas smaller than 4 × 104 μm2 were excluded from analysis
due to the very small numbers of cells, and therefore high variability in the
measurements. No further data were excluded from the analyses. Transient
tumor-bearing mice (controls) were randomized. Intravital microscopy
analysis was performed blinded, such that the person performing the analysis

NATURE CANCER | www.nature.com/natcancer
```