```plaintext
nature
cancer

ARTICLES
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-020-0036-4

Check for updates

Long-distance modulation of bystander tumor
cells by CD8+ T-cell-secreted IFN-γ

Mirjam E. Hoekstra1,3, Laura Bornes2,3, Feline E. Dijkgraaf1, Daisy Philips1, Iris N. Pardieck1,
Mireille Toebes1, Daniela S. Thommen1 ✉, Jacco van Rheenen2 and Ton N. M. Schumacher1 ✉

T-cell-secreted interferon (IFN)-γ can exert pleiotropic effects on tumor cells that include induction of immune checkpoints and
antigen presentation machinery components, and inhibition of cell growth. Despite its role as a key effector molecule, little is
known about the spatiotemporal spreading of IFN-γ secreted by activated CD8+ T cells within the tumor environment. Using
multidimensional imaging, we demonstrate that T cell recognition of a minor fraction of tumor cells leads to sensing of IFN-γ
by a large part of the tumor mass. Furthermore, imaging of tumors in which antigen-positive and antigen-negative tumor cells
are separated in space reveals spreading of the IFN-γ response, reaching distances of >800 μm. Notably, long-range sensing of
IFN-γ can modify tumor behavior, as shown by both induction of PD-L1 expression and inhibition of tumor growth. Collectively,
these data reveal how, through IFN-γ, CD8+ T cells modulate the behavior of remote tumor cells, including antigen-loss variants.

CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) play a central role in
immune-mediated control of cancer in both preclinical
models and cancer patients. First, CD8+ T cells that recog-
nize either shared antigens or patient-specific neoantigens are fre-
quently observed in cancer lesions1, and their intratumoral presence
of CD8+ T cells forms a positive prognostic marker in many cancer
types2,3. Second, interference with immune checkpoint molecules,
such as CTLA-4 and PD-1, which mediate an inhibitory axis, often
has resulted in prolonged clinical benefits in cancer patients4,5.
Furthermore, evidence for a role of PD-1-blocking antibodies has
been associated with the density of intratumoral CD8+ T cells before
treatment, and proliferation of intratumoral CD8+ T cells has been
observed in responding patients6. Third, and most directly, infu-
sion of autologous, tumor-infiltrating, lymphocyte-derived T cell
products, including CD8+ T cell products7, has shown benefit in
approximately 50% objective response rate in metastatic melanoma8
and has been demonstrated to induce regression of a subset of
epithelial cancers9.

The release of perforin- and granzymec-containing cytotoxic
granules toward target tumor cells forms a relatively well-under-
stood mechanism of action of CD8+ T cells in tumor control.
However, it has been called into question whether such direct tumor
cell killing can explain tumor control at the low T cell:tumor cell
ratios that are observed in tumors10. Next to the secretion of perfor-
in and granzymes, CTLs also respond to antigen encounter by the
secretion of cytokines, such as IFN-γ and tumor necrosis factor α
(TNF-α), which may modify the behavior of responding tumor cells.
As an example, signaling through the IFN-γ receptor (IFN-γR) can
induce the expression of the CXCL9, CXCL10 and CXCL11 che-
mokines, which induce migration of activated T cells to the tumor
site11. In addition, IFN-γR signaling leads to the enhanced expres-
sion of immune checkpoint molecules, such as PD-L1 and PD-L2,
but also increases the expression of components of the antigen pre-
sentation machinery12. Finally, IFN-γ can have direct cytopathic
and cytostatic effects on both cancer cells and stromal cells in the
tumor mass, inducing cell cycle arrest, cellular senescence or cell

death, depending on the (tumor) cell type involved12,14–16. Evidence
that these downstream effects of IFN-γR signaling are of relevance
in T-cell-mediated tumor control comes from several observa-
tions. Early work in mice by Schreiber and colleagues demonstrated
that tumor cells that lack the IFN-γR are much less sensitive to
T-cell-mediated clearance because of their reduced major histocom-
patibility complex (MHC) expression17. More recently, inactivation
of the IFN-γR signaling pathway, such as Stat1, Jak1 and Jak2,
IFN-γR1 and IFN-γR2, was shown to result in resistance to CD8+ T
cell attack in a series of in vivo or in vitro CRISPR-based genetic
screens18–20. In addition, enhanced sensitivity to CD8+ T cell attack
was obtained on loss of a chromatin regulator that suppresses sensi-
tivity of tumor cells to IFN-γ21. Importantly, inactivating mutations
in the IFN-γR signaling pathway have been demonstrated to pro-
mote tumor cell outgrowth in human tumors22,23 and such mutations
have been identified in tumors that either relapsed after anti-PD-1
treatment22 or showed upfront resistance to anti-CTLA-4 treatment24
and anti-PD-1 treatment25. Next to the direct effects of IFN-γ on
tumor cells themselves, T-cell-derived IFN-γ has also been shown to
induce tumor regression in preclinical models by targeting stromal
cells, such as endothelial cells in the tumor vasculature26–29.

In spite of this evidence for a widespread role of IFN-γR signaling
in tumor control, it is not well understood how different cells in the
tumor microenvironment (TME) encounter CD8+ T-cell-derived
IFN-γ. In particular, a number of studies have provided evidence
that transfer of peptide antigens with MHC class I molecules on stro-
mal cells (that is, through peptide cross-presentation) can result in
the IFN-γ-mediated killing of these cells. However, in other studies
it remains unclear whether IFN-γR signaling may also be induced
on ‘bystander cells’ that are not directly recognized by T cells. Such a
bystander effect of CD8+ T-cell-derived IFN-γ in tumor tissue would
be of potential interest, because it would allow activated T cells to
exert effects beyond the cells that they can directly contact, including
tumor cell subclones that have lost T-cell-recognized antigens30.
For CD4+ helper T cells, it has previously been established that
secreted IFN-γ can induce expression of IFN-γ-responsive genes in

1Division of Molecular Oncology & Immunology, Oncode Institute, the Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. 2Division of Molecular
Pathology, Oncode Institute, the Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. 3These authors contributed equally: Mirjam E. Hoekstra,
Laura Bornes. ✉e-mail: t.schumacher@nki.nl

NATURE CANCER | www.nature.com/natcancer
```