```plaintext
ARTICLES                                                                                     NATURE CANCER

cells outside parasite-infected areas13,29, with responding cells up to 
90um (that is, approximately four to eight cell layers) away from 
the closest infected cell30. By the same token, production of IFN-y 
and TNF-a by intratumoral CD4+ T cells has been shown to induce 
senescence in tumor cells that are deficient for MHC class II15. In 
the case of cytotoxic CD8+ T cells, seemingly contradictory results 
have been obtained. Specifically, in vitro and in vivo analyses of 
CD8+ T-cell-targeted conjugates indicate that the delivery of IFN-y is 
directed toward the immunologic synapse that is formed between 
these cells31,34, suggesting that the IFN-y signal emitted after T cell 
receptor (TCR) triggering would primarily reach the involved tar- 
get cell. In contrast, robust IFN-y signaling by bystander cells 
that lacked a specific T cell antigen has been observed in in vitro 
astrocyte-T cell cocultures, an observation that has been explained 
by synaptic leakage of CD8+ T-cell-produced IFN-y34. At present, 
in vivo data on the potential spread of CD8+ T-cell-derived IFN-y, 
including its spatiotemporal behavior, are lacking and, in the present 
study, we set out to analyze: (1) whether antigen-negative cells can 
sense the IFN-y released after a second antigen encounter by tumor-spe- 
cific CD8+ T cells; (2) how such a signal spreads through the tumor 
mass in space and time; and (3) whether the long-range sensing of 
IFN-y can yield a functional response of bystander tumor cells that 
cannot be directly recognized by T cells. The data obtained demon- 
strate that tumor recognition by even a limited number of intratu- 
moral CD8+ T cells induces a gradient of IFN-y that reaches tumor 
cells that have been removed by several cell layers. The observed 
long-range sensing of CD8+ T-cell-derived IFN-y has implications 
for both preventing tumor cell resistance to immune attack and the 
evolution of antigen-loss tumor cell states during clonal evolution.

Results

To analyze the spatiotemporal range of CD8+ T-cell-derived IFN-y, 
we generated a reporter system that allows for the visualization of 
IFN-y-induced signaling in tumor cells followed by the induction 
of a reporter gene. To this end, we first created a stable tumor cell 
reporter line that induces the expression of the Katushka fluorescent 
protein in cells after IFN-y triggering, and that consists of an 
IFN-y-signaling responsive promoter containing a series of gamma 
interferon activation sites (GAS elements), followed by the Katushka 
fluorescent protein (Fig. 1a). To validate this IGS reporter system, 
human ovarian carcinoma (OVCAR5) cells modified with the 
reporter were exposed to either IFN-y or IFN-a. In agreement with 
expectations, IGS reporter-modified tumor cells showed robust 
Katushka expression with an EC50 of 0.4 ng ml-1 at low concentrations 
of IFN-y (half-maximal concentration of approximately 3.7 ng ml-1), 
with a maximal Katushka signal 48h after stimulation (Fig. 1b and 
Extended data Fig. 1a). In contrast, exposure to IFN-a resulted in 
only low-level Katushka expression when used at high concentra- 
tions (100,000 U ml-1; Extended data Fig. 1b). Comparable reporter 
expression kinetics were observed in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer 
cells (Extended data Fig. 2a), and induction of reporter expression 
was highly correlated with induction of PD-L1, a known endoge- 
nous IFN-y-inducible protein (Fig. 1c and Extended data Fig. 2b). 
Notably, prolonged IFN-y exposure of OVCAR5 cells induced cell 
death (Extended data Fig. 1c,d), thereby providing a second, late 
and functional measure of IFN-y sensing. 
To measure in vivo IFN-y sensing by bystander cells that can- 
not be directly recognized by CD8+ T cells, we generated chimeric 
tumors that contain small adjacent groups of tumor cells that do 
not form T cell targets, by injection of mixtures of neoantigen- 
positive and neoantigen-negative tumor cells (Fig. 2a). Analysis of 
expression of the IGS reporter in the latter cells provides a means 
to determine whether tumor cell subclones that lack antigens are 
influenced by the IFN-y that is secreted by activated T cells in close 
proximity. Previous data have shown that, although bystander cells 
can respond to IFN-y released by CD8+ T cells in in vitro assays31, 

b

IFN-y
Receptor

STAT1 dimer

Katushka

4x GAS Katushka

Katushka+ of Ag- OGS cells (%)

24 h
48 h
72 h

0 0.1 0.3 1.0 3.0 10.0
IFN-y (ng ml-1)

c

MFI of PD-L1

15,000

10,000

5,000

0

1,000 2,000 3,000
MFI of Katushka

0 ng ml-1
3.7 ng ml-1

0.13 ng ml-1
11.1 ng ml-1

0.4 ng ml-1
33.3 ng ml-1

1.2 ng ml-1
100 ng ml-1

Fig. 1 | Characterization of the IGS reporter system. a, Schematic 
representation of the IGS reporter system. b, Percentage Katushka- 
expressing cells of IGS reporter-modified CFP+ OVCAR5 cells on incubation 
with the indicated concentrations of recombinant IFN-y. Bar graph shows 
the mean of n = 3 technical replicates and is representative data of two 
independent experiments. c, Mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of 
PD-L1 staining as function of median Katushka fluorescence intensity 
of CFP+ Ag- IGS reporter cells incubated for 24h with recombinant IFN-y 
at the indicated concentrations. Representative data of two independent 
experiments are depicted.

the IFN-y-containing vesicles in CD8+ T cells are selectively trans- 
ported toward the immunologic synapse35, suggesting localized 
effector activity to the target cell. To address whether the IFN-y 
that is secreted by activated intratumoral CD8+ T cells in vivo is 
sensed by bystander tumor cells, a GFP+ (green fluorescent protein- 
positive) OVCAR5 tumor cell line was generated that expresses 
the patient-derived mutant cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4)36 
neoantigen37. Subsequently, mixtures of these neoantigen-positive 
(Ag+) tumor cells, together with CFP+ IGS reporter cells that lack 
the mutant CDK4 neoantigen (Ag-), were injected into NOD scid 
Il2rytm1wjl/SzJ (NSG; B2m-/-) mice. In the absence of tumor-specific 
T cells, mixed developed chimeric tumors that were composed of small, 
intermingled groups of both tumor cell populations (Extended data 
Fig. 3a). To analyze to what extent bystander tumor cells that lack a 
T-cell-recognized antigen respond to CD8+ T-cell-secreted IFN-y, 
mice were treated with CD4k-specific, TCR-transduced, CD8+ 
T cells. Remarkably, although only a small fraction of bystander 
tumor cells showed detectable Katushka expression in control mice 
(3.2 ± 2.0%), a large fraction of bystander tumor cells (64.0 ± 8.3%) 
demonstrated pronounced Katushka expression in tumors with an 
ongoing tumor-specific T cell response (Fig. 2b,c and Extended data 
Fig. 4a), an observation that was replicated in the MDA-MB-231 
tumor model (Extended data Fig. 2c). This reporter expression by 
bystander tumor cells required the presence of both tumor-spe- 
cific CD8+ T cells and a subpopulation of antigen-positive tumor 
cells (Fig. 2d), and was observed even when the antigen-positive 
tumor cell subclone formed only a minor fraction (10%) of the 
tumor cell mass (Fig. 2d). To assess whether the observed reporter

NATURE CANCER | www.nature.com/natcancer
```