```
Commonly misidentified lines
(See ICLAC register)

No commonly misidentified lines were used in this study

Animals and other organisms
Policy information about studies involving animals; ARRIVE guidelines recommended for reporting animal research

Laboratory animals
Species: Mice
Strains: NOD-scid Il2rγnull/B2mnull
Sex: male and female (for mammary fatpad tumor injections only female mice were used)
Age: 8-26 weeks old

Wild animals
This study did not involve wild animals

Field-collected samples
This study did not involve samples collected from the field

Ethics oversight
All animal experiments were approved by the Animal Welfare Committee of the Netherlands Cancer Institute, in accordance with national guidelines

Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.

Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants

Population characteristics
No data on specific patient characteristics. 51 samples collected from patients undergoing tumor resection surgery were assessed for B2m and CD8 expression.

Recruitment
Patients were not recruited, material was obtained following an opt-out procedure.

Ethics oversight
Study was approved by the local medical ethical committee (institutional review board (IRB) of The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Antoni van Leeuwenhoek hospital (NKI-AVL)).

Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.

Flow Cytometry
Plots

Confirm that:
☐ The axis labels state the marker and fluorochrome used (e.g. CD4-FITC).
☒ The axis scales are clearly visible. Include numbers along axes only for bottom left plot of group (a 'group' is an analysis of identical markers).
☒ All plots are contour plots with outliers or pseudocolor plots.
☒ A numerical value for number of cells or percentage (with statistics) is provided.

Methodology
Sample preparation
Cell lines were cultured, and when attaching cells, harvested by trypsin EDTA treatment. All cells were stained in PBS containing 0.5% w/v bovine serum albumin and 0.2% w/v sodium azide.

Instrument
BD LSRII or BDFortessa

Software
Data were collected using BD FacsDiva and analyzed using FlowJo

Cell population abundance
All sorted populations described in the text were sorted with >90% purity, as confirmed by flow cytometry after cell outgrowth to high numbers.

Gating strategy
Cells were gated first by morphology to exclude cell debris, doublets were then gated out by FSC-A/FSC- followed by exclusion of dead cells by gating on IR-Dye negative cells.

☐ Tick this box to confirm that a figure exemplifying the gating strategy is provided in the Supplementary Information.

nature research | reporting summary

October 2018

3
```