```plaintext
other recent studies (10, 12). Treatment of adoptively transferred 
T cells or of recipient mice with FTY720 or S1P significantly 
reduced T cell migration to the dLN (10, 12). Interestingly, acute 
inflammation was shown to increase S1P levels in the skin and 
also resulted in reduced migration of CD4+ T cells to the dLN 
(10). This suggests that acute inflammation might induce T cell 
retention in the tissue.

T cells that have migrated from the skin to the dLN display 
high expression of CCR7, CXCR4, and S1P1 (7, 10). In contrast to 
the involvement of CCR7 and S1P1, CXCR4 was reported to have 
no role in T cell migration from homeostatic (10) or inflamed 
skin to the dLN (11). By contrast, in a pancreatic islet transplanta-
tion model, CCR2, CCR5, and CXCR3 reportedly contributed to 
the migration of natural Treg (nTreg) from the allograft to the dLN 
(66, 68). While LECs constitutively produce CXCL12, CCL21, 
and S1P (41, 131), they are also able to upregulate inflammatory 
chemokines under conditions of tissue inflammation (131, 132). 
This upregulation occurs in a stimulus-specific manner (131) and 
may serve to fine-tune leukocyte recruitment into LVs. Although 
not specifically studied so far, changes in the chemokine expres-
sion profile of LECs might also explain the reduced CCR7 and 
S1P dependence of T cell tissue exit observed from chronically 
but not from acutely inflamed skin (12). On the other hand, it 
has to be considered that most studies investigating T cell tissue 
exit have been performed using acutely transferred T cells, 
which might not completely reflect the chronic (or adhesion 
molecule) requirements of endogenous T cells.

Adhesion Molecules Involved in Entry 
and Migration within Afferent LVs 
MR and CLEVER-1 
Few adhesion molecules have thus far been implicated in T cell 
exit from skin. The MR (82), which has been shown to mediate 
T cell binding to lymphatic sinuses in LNs (82), is also expressed 
on efferent and afferent LVs (133, 134). Interaction of MR with 
its T cell-expressed binding partner CD44 reportedly mediates 
CD4+ and CD8+ T cell exit from the skin (115, 116). Similarly, 
CLEVER-1 is expressed on both efferent and afferent LVs and 
has been shown to mediate T cell entry into afferent LVs (81, 117, 
135). Blockade of CLEVER-1 markedly decreased CD4+ and 
CD8+ T cell migration from the skin to the dLN in both mice 
and rabbits (117).

VCAM-1, Selectins, and Their Ligands 
A recent study suggested a role for LEC-expressed VCAM-1 in 
homeostatic migration of nTreg but not of naïve CD4+ or CD8+ 
T cells from skin to the dLN (67). VCAM-1 is a known target 
of LTβR (136) and blockade of LTβR reduced nTreg exit from the 
skin (67). Similarly, after nTreg devoid of the LTβR ligand, LTα, 
exited from the skin (67). As with ICAM-1, VCAM-1 expression 
is induced on afferent LVs during inflammatory conditions (131, 
132). Whether VCAM-1 might more broadly support T cell 
migration through afferent LVs in the context of tissue inflamma-
tion remains to be determined. With regard to the involvement 
of selectins, T cell migration from homeostatic skin to dLNs was 
found to occur normally in mice lacking the ligands for P-, E-, 
and L-selectins or upon adoptive transfer of CD62L− T cells 
(10). However, it is noteworthy that P-selectin is also upregulated 
on afferent LVs during contact hypersensitivity-induced inflam-
mation (131). This raises the question whether inflammation-
induced selectins and their ligands might play a role in T cell exit 
under inflammatory conditions.

Insights into T Cell Entry into the LN 
from Afferent LVs 
While several studies highlight the entry of T cells through HEVs 
or the migration of T cells within LNs (75, 137), few have focused 
on the entry of T cells into LNs from afferent LVs. Braun and col-
leagues investigated this entry pathway by performing time-lapse 
imaging in the popliteal LN following microinjection of T cells 
directly into the cannulated afferent LV (25). This study revealed 
that most naïve CD4+ T cells were passively transported in the 
SCS to peripheral medullary sinuses where they either directly 
transmigrated, or first crawled within the peripheral medullary 
sinuses before transmigrating into the LN parenchyma at the level 
of the medullary sinuses (25). As reported for T cell egress from 
the LN parenchyma into lymphatic sinuses (23, 101), several T 
cells occasionally crossed the sinus floor at specific transmigra-
tion “hot spots” (25). Interestingly, naïve CD4+ T cells entered 
across the medullary sinuses in a CCR7-independent manner, 
but subsequently preferentially migrated within the medullary 
cords via paracortical LVs in a manner that was a CCR7-skewed 
pathway.

In contrast to T cells, injected DCs were able to directly trans-
migrate the SCS floor of the LN, allowing for a more rapid entry 
of the LN parenchyma (25). On the other hand, T cells injected 
after pre-injection of DCs now transmigrated the SCS floor on 
the afferent side of the LN and avidly migrated inward at sites 
of DC transmigration (25). These findings suggested that DCs 
induced local changes in the SCS floor during transmigration 
that facilitated direct entry of T cells into the LN parenchyma. 
Considering that afferent lymph typically contains both T cells 
and DCs that arrive simultaneously in the subcapsular space, it 
will be interesting to further explore LN entry from afferent LVs 
in an endogenous setup.

Other studies have suggested that T cells might enter the 
LN parenchyma directly through the SCS: as early as 4 h after 
adoptive transfer into the footpad of mice, T cells could be 
detected within the LN parenchyma in close proximity to the 
SCS (13, 118). Moreover, macrophage scavenger receptor 1, a 
molecule expressed on LECs of the SCS, but not on the medullary 
or cortical sinuses, was recently found to regulate lymphocyte 
entry into the LN parenchyma (118). Furthermore, the same 
group previously reported the involvement of plasmalemma 
vesicle associated protein (PLVAP, also known as MECA-32) in 
lymphocyte entry across the SCS into the LN parenchyma (13). 
PLVAP is expressed by LECs in lymphatic sinuses where it forms 
diaphragms that overlay the entry to the FRC conduit system. 
This generates a sort of molecular sieve that restricts the access 
of soluble antigen into the conduit system and hence into the 
LN parenchyma. Interestingly, PLVAP also appeared to regulate 

Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org 8 December 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 613
```