```markdown
frontiers

in Immunology

REVIEW
published: 21 December 2016
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00613

T Cell Trafficking through
Lymphatic Vessels

Morgan C. Hunter1, Alvaro Teijeira2 and Cornelia Halin1*

1 Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 2 Immunology and Immunotherapy Department,
CIMA, Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain

T cell migration within and between peripheral tissues and secondary lymphoid organs
is essential for proper functioning of adaptive immunity. While active T cell migration
within a tissue is fairly slow, blood vessels and lymphatic vessels (LVs) serve as speedy
highways that enable T cells to travel rapidly over long distances. The molecular and cel-
lular mechanisms of T cell migration out of blood vessels have been intensively studied
over the past 30 years. By contrast, less is known about T cell trafficking through the
lymphatic vasculature. This migratory process occurs in one manner within lymph nodes
(LNs), where recirculating T cells continuously exit into efferent lymphatics to return to
the blood circulation. In another manner, T cell trafficking through lymphatics also occurs
in peripheral tissues, where T cells exit the tissue by means of afferent lymphatics, to
migrate to draining LNs and back into blood. In this review, we highlight how the anatomy
of the lymphatic vasculature supports T cell trafficking and review current knowledge
regarding the molecular and cellular requirements of T cell migration through LVs. Finally,
we summarize and discuss recent insights regarding the presumed relevance of T cell
trafficking through afferent lymphatics.

Keywords: T cells, migration, trafficking, afferent, efferent, lymphatic vessels, lymph node

INTRODUCTION

In an antigen-inexperienced host, the frequency of naïve T cells specific for any given antigen
is extremely low, several thousand at most (1, 2). Given that the diversity of possible antigens
is almost countless and that T cell activation requires direct contact with antigen, naïve T cells
constantly circulate through secondary lymphoid organs (SLOs) in pursuit of antigen (1, 2). Upon
encountering antigen in SLOs, antigen-specific naïve T cells proliferate and become activated
effector T cells (Teff) that egress from SLOs and enter peripheral tissue at sites of inflammation
(2, 3). Most Teff die after antigen is cleared but a few antigen-experienced T cells remain for long-
term protection and either develop into tissue-resident memory T cells (TRM), into central memory
T cells (TCM) that recirculate between SLOs and blood, or into effector-memory T cells (TEM) that
circulate through blood and home to inflamed tissue (1, 2). In addition to the abovementioned
antigen-experienced cell types, regulatory T cells (Treg) also circulate between blood, tissue, and
SLOs (2–4).

Throughout the life of a T cell, the blood and lymphatic vasculature act as highways for T cell
circulation. While much is known about T cell migration across and within the blood vasculature,
much less is known about T cell migration into and within the lymphatic vasculature. Since the
late 1950s, cannulation studies in sheep and rats have helped develop our current understanding
of the cell subsets that circulate through lymphatic vessels (LVs). More recent technical advances

OPEN ACCESS

Edited by:
Sonia Nadeau,
Weill Cornell Medical College, USA

Reviewed by:
Theresa T. Lu,
Weill Cornell Medical College, USA
Susan Schwab,
New York University School of
Medicine, USA
Jonathan Bromberg,
University of Maryland, USA

*Correspondence:
Cornelia Halin
cornelia.halin@pharma.ethz.ch

Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Inflammation,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Immunology

Received: 12 October 2016
Accepted: 05 December 2016
Published: 21 December 2016

Citation:
Hunter MC, Teijeira A and Halin C
(2016) T Cell Trafficking through
Lymphatic Vessels.
Front. Immunol. 7:613.
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00613

Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org 1 December 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 613
```