```plaintext
nature immunology

REVIEW

Antigen presentation to naive CD4 T cells
in the lymph node

Andrea A Itano & Marc K Jenkins

Although the presentation of peptide–major histocompatibility complex class II (pMHC class II) complexes to CD4 T cells has
been studied extensively in vitro, knowledge of this process in vivo is limited. Unlike the in vitro situation, antigen presentation
in vivo takes place within a complex microenvironment in which the movements of antigens, antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and
T cells are governed by anatomic constraints. Here we review developments in the areas of lymph node architecture, APC subsets
and T cell activation that have shed light on how antigen presentation occurs in the lymph nodes.

Initiation of many aspects of the adaptive immune response depends
on CD4 T cell recognition of foreign pMHC class II complexes on the
surface of APCs. Although several cell types express MHC class II mol-
ecules, it is believed that dendritic cells (DCs) are the initiating APCs,
because they are located at portals of antigen entry and are efficient at
antigen uptake, processing, pMHC complex display and migration to
the T cell areas of secondary lymphoid organs1. Moreover, DCs are the
first to stimulate the DCs at the site of initial pMHC complex presentation
may determine whether the responding naive T cells become memory
cells or are deleted, silenced or suppressed2,3.

Although much circumstantial evidence indicates the DCs is essential,
it is still not clear which cells first present pMHC class II complexes to
naive CD4 T cells in vivo. It is clear from in vitro experiments that other
MHC class II–expressing cells (for example, macrophages and B cells)
are capable of presenting pMHC class II complexes and stimulating
naive CD4 T cells, albeit less efficiently than DCs4,5. Given this potential,
could macrophages or B cells initiate the primary CD4 T cell response?
In addition, if DCs are the initiating APCs, which of the many subsets
are involved? Is the response initiated exclusively by DCs that migrate
from the nonlymphoid site of antigen entry, or are the DCs that are
already in the secondary lymphoid organs involved? If so, do migrating
and resident DCs induce different types of T cell responses?

The blood and lymphatic vasculature that pervades the site at which
antigen enters the body determines, to a large extent, the type of sec-
ondary lymphoid organ in which the CD4 T cell response begins6.
This ‘plumbing’ determines that immune responses to antigens, which
enter the body through the skin, mucosal surfaces or blood, begin in
the peripheral lymph nodes, mucosal lymphoid organs or spleen,
respectively. This review will focus on pMHC class II complex presen-
tation to naive CD4 T cells in lymph nodes.

CD4 T cell activation in secondary lymphoid organs
In many cases, antigens that are eventually presented in the lymph
nodes first enter the body in nonlymphoid tissues, such as the subcuta-
neous tissue after skin puncture. It is therefore theoretically possible
that nonlymphoid sites of antigen entry are the places where naive CD4
T cells are first activated. This is unlikely, as much evidence indicates
that naive CD4 T cells have little, if any, access to parts of the body other
than the blood and secondary lymphoid organs7. For example, naive
CD4 T cells could only be detected in the lymph nodes, spleen and
mucosal lymphoid tissues using whole-animal immunohistology8.
This anatomic limitation indicates that in most cases the initial activa-
tion of naive CD4 T cells must occur in secondary lymphoid organs as a
result of antigen transport from nonlymphoid tissues. As noted below,
however, this image may be an exception to this rule.

MHC class II–expressing cells in the lymph node
Three cell types within the murine lymph node express MHC class II
molecules, and thus have the potential to activate CD4 T cells:
macrophages, B cells and DCs. However, because macrophages are
located mainly in nonlymphoid tissues, the red pulp of the spleen, and
the subcapsular and medullary sinuses of lymph nodes9,10, but not in
the T cell areas, it is unlikely that these cells act as initial APCs. Indeed,
T cell–dependent immune responses are induced normally in mice
deficient in macrophage colony-stimulating factor that lack sinusoidal
macrophages11. Although this result indicates that macrophages are
not essential for initiation of the CD4 T cell response, not all
macrophages are absent in mice deficient in macrophage colony-
stimulating factor11. Thus, it remains possible that a subset of
macrophages is involved in initial pMHC class II complex presen-
tation to naive CD4 T cells in the lymph nodes. However, the abundance
of macrophages in many nonlymphoid organs indicates that these
cells are important APCs for effector CD4 T cells that migrate into
nonlymphoid organs at late stages of the primary immune response8.

B cells are also unlikely to be involved in the initial pMHC class II
complex presentation to naive CD4 T cells. Although it was reported
that all B cells in the lymph nodes produce lysozyme pMHC class II

Andrea A. Itano and Marc K. Jenkins are in the Department of Microbiology and
the Center for Immunology, University of Minnesota, MMC 334, 420 Delaware
St. SE, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA. Correspondence should be
addressed to M.K.J. (marcj@mail.ahc.umn.edu).

NATURE IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 4 NUMBER 8 AUGUST 2003 733
```