```plaintext
REVIEW

© 2003 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureimmunology

complexes several hours after injection of a large amount of lyso-
zyme12, earlier work indicated that B cells lacking an antigen-specific
surface immunoglobulin (Ig) molecule are very inefficient at taking up
antigen and stimulating relevant CD4 T cells13. Indeed, in a different
study in which less antigen was injected, less than 10% of the DCs in
the draining lymph nodes produced pMHC class II complexes14. In
any case, no matter how many B cells produce pMHC class II com-
plexes from a given antigen, the paucity of B cells in the T cell areas
indicates that B cells are unlikely to be the initial APCs for naïve T cells
in most situations. In support of this contention, in vivo proliferation
of antigen-specific CD4 T cells after immunization is normal in B
cell–deficient mice15.

Although these results indicate that B cells are not required, they
may still participate in activating APCs for naïve CD4 T cells. In sup-
port of this idea, naïve antigen-specific CD4 T cells proliferated in
mice injected with antigen-pulsed B cells expressing surface
immunoglobulin specific for the antigen17. The T cells were stimu-
lated in part by direct recognition of pMHC class II complexes on the
injected B cells. The antigen-specific CD4 T cells and B cells could have
interacted as the B cells traveled out of the blood and through the T cell
areas on the way to the B cell–rich follicles18. Direct initial presentation
by B cells, however, may be limited to this special situation in which
large numbers of B cells display pMHC class II complexes. Most of the
literature on soluble antigens indicates that rare antigen-specific B
cells only present pMHC class II complexes to CD4 T cells that were
initially activated by DCs19,20 (Supplementary Video online,
00:00:37–00:00:45).

As B cells and macrophages are not required for activation of naïve
CD4 T cells, and DCs are the only other MHC class II–expressing cells
that occupy the T cell areas of the lymph nodes21, DCs are probably
the essential APCs for initial pMHC class II presentation to naïve CD4
T cells in most situations, although they may also be involved in the
activation of B cells22 and natural killer cells23. In addition to this indi-
rect evidence, direct confirmation that DCs are the main initiating
APCs comes from two studies that examined the interaction between
draining DCs and antigen-specific CD4 T cells in situ. One showed that
ovalbumin-specific T cells formed small clusters around fluorescent
DCs in draining lymph nodes 24 hours after subcutaneous injection of
fluorochrome-labeled ovalbumin.24 Similarly, another showed that
DCs were the main cell type forming fluorescent latex beads coated
with ovalbumin, and that ovalbumin-specific T cells were found adja-
cent to bead-containing DCs in peribronchial lymph nodes 12 hours
after beads were given intranasally25. In addition, real-time micro-
scope imaging showed that antigen-specific T cells form clusters 32
hours after exposure to subcutaneously injected soluble antigen26.
Although it was not demonstrated in the last study that DCs were in
these T cell clusters, the location of these clusters in the T cell areas was
consistent with the possibility that DCs were present. Indeed, a sepa-
rate in vivo analysis of these clusters showed that they contain DCs27.

These are important experiments, as they attempted to detect anti-
gen presentation in situ. However, this approach has its limitations. By
tracking intact antigen, it can only be assumed that the cells that con-
tained the antigen and were interacting with antigen-specific T cells
actually displayed the relevant pMHC complexes. Also, these experi-
ments did not demonstrate that the DC–T cell interaction caused the
interacting T cells to become activated. However, together with the
studies of B cell– and macrophage-deficient mice, these physical find-
ings provide evidence that DCs directly interact with naïve T cells and,
that because these interactions are antigen-dependent, they probably
represent actual antigen presentation events.

Given that DCs are probably the cells that first present pMHC class
II complexes to naïve CD4 T cells, the question then becomes which of
the many DC subsets are involved. The answer to this question seems
to depend on the form of the antigen and the way that it enters the

Figure 1 Location of DC subsets in the lymph
node. The skin contains two main types of
immature DCs: Langerhans cells (dark blue) in the
epidermis, and interstitial DCs (purple) in the
dermis. The dermal DCs are probably similar in
origin and function to interstitial DCs that exist in
other nonlymphoid tissues, whereas Langerhans
cells are unique to the epidermis. Both
populations of DCs migrate to the draining lymph
node through afferent lymphatic vessels at a low
constant rate, which increases considerably in
response to inflammatory signals. Inflamed skin
also contains a population of monocytes (light
blue), which, after migrating to the draining
lymph node, can acquire a DC phenotype and
morphology. In addition to these three skin-
derived DC subsets, a skin-draining lymph node
contains three DC subsets that enter through the
HEV: blood-derived CD11b+ (orange), blood-
derived CD8α+ (red) and plasmacytoid (green)
DCs. Blood-derived CD8α+ DCs localize to the
center of the cortex, whereas blood-derived
CD11b+ DCs, Langerhans cell immigrants and
dermal DC immigrants occupy the outer cortex,
near the conduits that surround the HEVs and
follicles.

Langerhans cell
Interstitial (dermal) DC
Monocyte

Blood-derived
CD11b+ DC
Blood-derived
CD8α+ DC
Plasmacytoid DC

Skin
Epidermis
Dermis
Afferent
lymphatic
vessel
Subcapsular
sinus
B cell
follicle
HEV
Efferent
lymphatic
vessel

734

VOLUME 4 NUMBER 8 AUGUST 2003 NATURE IMMUNOLOGY
```