REVIEW

from the antigen. This early display of pMHC class II complexes coin-
cided with CD69 induction on, and IL-2 production by, antigen-
specific CD4 T cells.
   Analysis of DC subsets in the skin-draining nodes can be complicated
by the similar surface phenotype of Langerhans cell immigrants and
dermal DC immigrants. Both populations express similar amounts of
CD11c, MHC class II and CD40, and can be distinguished only by subtle
differences in the amounts of CD80, CD11b and CD205. Thus, the
MHC class II+ populations of DCs shown to cause tumor rejection64 or
delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions60 could have included dermal
DCs. In the future, it will be necessary to use Langerhans cell–specific
markers such as Langerin59,65 to unambiguously determine which skin-
derived DC subsets are involved in antigen presentation.
   Interstitial DC immigrants in lymph nodes are similar to Langerhans
cell immigrants except that their immature forms are located in inter-
stitial spaces other than the epidermis. The involvement of interstitial
DC immigrants as APCs can be inferred from several recent reports. As
described above, pMHC class II complexes displayed by interstitial
(dermal) DC immigrants was directly detected using the Y-Ae antibody
after subcutaneous injection of a soluble antigen containing a T-cell
addition, CD11c+, MHCII+ cells containing fluorochrome-labeled oval-
bumin appeared in the lung-associated lymph nodes after intratracheal
administration of this antigen66. As these cells expressed CD11b and
CD205, not CD80, they were probably interstitial DCs that acquired
antigen in the interstitial tissue of the trachea and then migrated to the
draining lymph nodes. When isolated from the peribronchial lymph
nodes, these DCs stimulated ovalbumin-specific CD4 T cells in vitro66,
indicating that the cells displayed the relevant pMHC class II complexes
in vivo. However, T cell priming in these conditions occurs in mice
lacking lymph nodes, raising the possibility that the initial pMHC class
II presentation takes place in the lung parenchyma67, not the secondary
lymphoid organs as in most other immune responses.
   Interstitial DC immigrants may also be the initiating APCs for anti-
gens that enter the body through the reproductive tract. Interstitial DC
immigrants from the submucosa, but not Langerhans cell immigrants
or blood-derived CD8α+ DCs, stimulated herpes simplex virus 2–
specific CD4 T cells after intravaginal inoculation of herpes simplex
virus 2 (ref. 68).

Figure 2 Localization of lymph node DCs, injected soluble antigen and
collagen network in situ. Small soluble proteins introduced into tissue travel
rapidly to the draining lymph node through the afferent lymphatic vessels.
The proteins first enter the subcapsular sinus of the lymph node, and then
enter the conduits that connect the subcapsular sinus to HEVs that border
the B cell–rich follicles. In each of two serial sections, a fluorescent protein
(red) is found in the conduits of the draining lymph node 30 minutes after
injection. B cell–rich follicles are shown in blue (stained with antibody to
B220). (a) Conduits containing collagen type III (green) fibers link the
subcapsular sinus (SC) to the HEVs (round or elliptical objects), and
are densest near the B cell–rich follicles. At 30 minutes after subcutaneous
injection, soluble antigen (red) co-localizes with the subcapsular sinus and
conduits nearest the subcapsular sinus. (b) Higher magnification of the area
outlined by the white square in a shows that some of the soluble protein
colocalizes with the conduits (yellow; arrows), whereas some antigen is
located just outside of but is associated with the conduits (red; circle). (c)
DCs expressing large amounts of CD40 (green) near the follicles may have
access to soluble antigen (red) that is carried in the conduits that are
abundant in this area. (d) Higher magnification of the area outlined by the
white square in c shows CD40+ DCs containing antigen (yellow; arrows).

   Subcutaneously injected fluorescent microspheres are engulfed not
only by interstitial DCs but also by monocytes that quickly enter the
injection site from the blood, probably in response to inflammatory
mediators induced by tissue damage caused by the injection52. Within
24 hours, cells containing more than one bead and expressing large
amounts of MHC class II and CD11c can be found among DC–specific
molecules, but small amounts of CD11c and no Langerhans cell markers,
appear in the draining lymph nodes. Monocytes that engulf particles
and transmigrate in vitro across artificial endothelial cell layer also
acquire phenotypic characteristics of DCs69. These results indicate that
monocytes enter that tissue sites and engulf particles receiving signals to
differentiate into DCs in the process of migrating from the tissue into
an afferent lymphatic vessel. Although these monocyte-derived DCs
are able to stimulate naive T cells in vitro70, their function in antigen
presentation in vivo has yet to be determined.

Migrating and resident DCs
   In vitro studies have shown that proinflammatory cytokines cause
Langerhans cells and other types of immature DCs to express more co-
stimulatory molecules, reduce antigen uptake and processing, and stabi-
lize surface pMHC class II complexes71. This process, often referred to as
DC maturation, is thought to be coupled with DC migration, as
inflammatory stimuli also induce tissue-resident DCs to travel to the
draining lymph nodes. These linked processes would ensure that DCs
migrating from the tissue are prepared to stimulate the appropriate
naive T cells after arriving in the draining lymph node. Based on this
model, most of the tissue-derived DCs that first arrive in the lymph
node should have the properties of mature DCs. Indeed, Langerin-positive
cells from skin-draining lymph nodes have large amounts of MHC class
II molecules, and most express the maturation markers 2A1, CD86 and
CD40 (ref. 2). However, a small subset of Langerin-positive cells were found
to be 2A1–, and thus seemed to be immature59. As discussed below,
these immature cells may be important in presenting pMHC class II
complexes derived from soluble antigens acquired in the lymph nodes.
   The sites at which the DCs in the aforementioned studies acquired
antigen are not always apparent. It has been assumed that most of the
DCs that present pMHC class II complexes to CD4 T cells acquired their
antigens at the point of entry in the body before migrating to the lymph

© 2003 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/natureimmunology

736

VOLUME 4 NUMBER 8 AUGUST 2003 NATURE IMMUNOLOGY