```
node, as studies of lymph node architecture indicate that lymph-borne 
soluble antigens do not have free access to the T cell areas71. 

Antigens injected subcutaneously are transported from the tissue 
into the subcapsular sinus of a connected lymph node through the 
afferent lymphatic vessels72. Narrow conduits connect the subcapsular 
sinus to perivenular spaces that surround the HEVs that pass through 
the lymph node71. These conduits are composed of type I and type III 
collagen fibers wrapped continuously on the outside with a coating of 
90% reticular fibroblasts and 10% other cells, including DCs71,73. The 
lumen of each conduit is not completely filled with the fibers, as small 
molecules pass from the subcapsular sinus into the perivenular space 
through these conduits. This network of conduits allows soluble pro- 
teins generated in the tissue, such as cytokines and chemokines, to end 
up on the lumenal side of the HEV. 

Although the conduits are abundant in the T cell areas in which 
naive T cells reside, large amounts of soluble molecules do not pass 
from the subcapsular sinus or conduits into this area74. However, two 
studies have indicated that leakage of soluble proteins out of the con- 
duits probably occurs in some conditions14,43. Both studies showed 
that pMHC class II complexes were made by lymph node DCs 6 
hours after a subcutaneous injection of antigen. As tissue-derived 
DCs require about 12 hours to migrate to the lymph node49, the DCs 
that produced these early pMHC class II complexes must have already 
been in the lymph node when they acquired the antigen. 

This finding that pMHC class II complexes are generated very 
early times indicates that at least some soluble antigen can leak out of the 
conduits. This is supported by a study showing that small, protease- 
solved collagen shards surrounding HEVs are not solid structures, but 
rather sponges75. If soluble proteins can leak out of the conduits and 
flow through these pores, then it is reasonable to assume that the cells 
nearest the conduits would have the best access to this source of antigen 
(Supplementary Video online, 00:00:24–00:00:31). Indeed, it was 
demonstrated that almost no subcutaneously injected soluble antigen was 
present in the conduits 30 minutes (Fig. 2a,b), some of the antigen 
was in CD40+ cells near the conduits (Fig. 2c,d). These cells were 
CD11c+CD11b+ Langerhans cell immigrants and dermal DC immi- 
grants44. The fact that these cells produced pMHC class II complexes 
from antigen that leaked from the conduits indicates that tissue-derived 
DCs are still capable of antigen uptake and processing even though at 
this time. This is unexpected, as post-migration DCs are thought to have 
undergone the maturation process, and thus should be inefficient at 
antigen uptake. However, one study indicated that this is not true for in 
vitro–matured DCs76. Langerhans cells that were introduced to mature and 
migrate from the skin through the use of a skin irritant and lipopolysac- 
charide, and were then isolated from the lymph node, retained their 
capacity to endocytose proteins, compared with in vitro–matured 
Langerhans cells that had lost that ability. 

The acquisition of free antigen from the conduits does not reduce the 
importance of migrating DCs. Even in the study in which evidence of 
presentation of free antigen was found43, it is likely that tissue-resident 
DCs that acquired the antigen at the injection site migrated to the 
lymph node and presented pMHC class II complexes. Indeed, the 
CD11c+CD8α+ cells identified as APCs in this study could have been 
such intranodal DC immigrants. Similarly, the interstitial DCs shown 
to migrate from the vaginal epithelium were probably the main presen- 
ters of herpes simplex virus 2 pMHC class II complexes68. Finally, it was 
shown that dermal DCs, which pick up subcutaneously injected anti- 
gen in the tissue and migrate to the lymph node at 24 hours, sustain the 
activation of CD4 T cells that were initially activated by pMHC class II 
complexes on resident lymph node DCs14 (Supplementary Video 
online, 00:00:32–00:00:38). 

Functional effects of DC antigen presentation 

Although both resident and migrating DCs have the capacity to 
acquire antigens and generate pMHC class II complexes, differences 
between the two populations could have functional consequences. 
Most evidence in the literature indicates that pMHC class II presenta- 
tion by DCs that recently migrated from nonlymphoid tissue stimu- 
lates T cell immunity. This property may be explained by the fact that 
the migration of DCs from tissues is closely tied with stabilization of 
pMHC complexes and increased expression of costimulatory mole- 
cules such as CD80 and CD8644,49,77, which are required for optimal 
activation of naive T cells. Because the rate of DC migration into lym- 
phoid organs from nonlymphoid tissues is low in the absence of 
inflammation50,59, pMHC complex presentation by highly stimula- 
tory immigrants should only predominate in conditions of tissue 
damage or infection, in which productive T cell immunity is desirable. 

Although recent immigrants may be inherently stimulatory, other 
DCs in the secondary lymphoid organs can be tolerogenic, at least in 
certain circumstances. Mice injected with a DC-specific rat IgG2b 
monoclonal antibody developed rat IgG2b–specific T and B cell toler- 
ance, whereas mice injected with this antibody plus an inflammatory 
adjuvant (IL-1) generated anti-rat IgG2b–specific immunity78. This 
type of antigen-targeting experiment was repeated78, but with the 
important modification that antigen-specific CD4 T cells were moni- 
tored directly. CD205+ DCs (blood-derived DCs47, DCs, Langerhans 
cells and interstitial DCs) were targeted in vivo for antigen uptake by 
injection of antibody to CD205 fused to a peptide from hen egg 
lysozyme (αDEC-HEL). HEL-specific CD4 T cells in those mice 
proliferated and then disappeared in mice injected with αDEC-HEL 
and the αDEC-HEL–specific mice expressed more CD40 and CD86, and 
the same specific T cells proliferated and survived as memory cells. 
Therefore, resident lymph node DCs are capable of inducing T cell tol- 
erance or immunity, depending on the inflammatory context in which 
they present pMHC complexes. 

The finding that antigen targeting to DCs in the absence of inflam- 
mation is tolerogenic for T cells raises the possibility that DCs are 
involved in the induction of peripheral tolerance to self antigens. DCs 
may be normally kept in a tolerogenic state by a process involving 
engulfment of apoptotic cells. Mice with genetic defects in the disposal 
of apoptotic cells have constitutively activated DCs79 and develop 
autoimmunity80,80. Disposal of apoptotic cells and maintenance of T 
cell tolerance may be linked by the fact that phagocytes that take up 
apoptotic cells produce anti-inflammatory factors such as IL- 
10,81,82,83, which inhibit the expression of costimulatory molecules84. 
Resident DCs are well positioned for this purpose, as they constitu- 
tively express self pMHC complexes85 and are located near naive T 
cells, a fraction of which must be apoptotic as a consequence of normal 
senescence. As migration of acutely activated DCs from nonlymphoid 
tissues is thought to require inflammation51,57, these suppressed resi- 
dent DCs would be the main cells capable of presenting pMHC com- 
plexes derived from self antigens or foreign antigens injected in the 
absence of inflammation. 

Future directions 

Most of our understanding of how DCs process and present antigens 
to T cells comes from in vitro studies. Although in some cases antigen 
is administered in vivo, in vitro T cell assays are still generally used to 
detect the presence of pMHC complexes. This process involves the 
removal of the DC and T cell from their natural environment, and 
thus results from such experiments must be viewed with caution. 
Other experiments attempting to identify antigen presentation events 

NATURE IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 4 NUMBER 8 AUGUST 2003 737
```