```plaintext
2644                                                                                                           Krouglova et al.

DISCUSSION

In this article we wanted to determine absolute diffusion
coefficients and we first showed that we are able to do this for
a wide variety of molecular masses. We also show that our
instrument does not suffer from non-Gaussian excitation
profiles.

The nice correlation between the diffusion coefficients and
the molecular mass of several proteins (ovalbumin, BSA,
catalase, ferritin, thyroglobulin) obtained from FCS mea-
surements, corresponds perfectly with theory. This correla-
tion allows us to estimate the molecular mass of tubulin in
different conditions.

The analysis of tubulin oligomerization in the presence of
magnesium ions has also been described in this article. High
magnesium concentrations induce the formation of tubulin
oligomers and rings. In our experiments we found that at
a concentration of 16 mM of MgCl2 the diffusion coefficient
decreases with increasing tubulin concentration and this
reflects the formation of open oligomers. The value of the
diffusion coefficient of tubulin at its highest concentration
obtained, in the presence of 16 mM Mg2+, is determined to
be (2.8 6 0.3) 3 10^-11 m^2/s. We suppose that this diffusion
coefficient is for oligomers of the tubulin dimer and we
estimate it would contain not more than six tubulin dimers,
as the diffusion coefficient of thyroglobulin with molecular
mass of 669 kD is equal to 2.4 3 10^-11 m^2/s. The diffu-
sion coefficient of tubulin is still higher than the value of
2.2 3 10^-11 m^2/s of the cryptophycin-tubulin ring
(containing eight dimers) also measured with FCS (Boukar-
rat et al., 2003).

Applying the theory of Oosawa and Kasai (1962) to the
formation of tubulin oligomers allows us to obtain the
association constant in the presence of 16 mM Mg2+. This
value is determined to be 0.091 6 0.004 mM^-1 for the
longitudinal model and 0.108 6 0.003 mM^-1 for the lateral
model. Both values are in good agreement with the data
obtained by Frigon and Timasheff (1975) and we cannot
make the distinction between the two shapes.

The forms of the tubulin oligomers that are studied in this
article are different from tubulin rings. This can be concluded
from the values of the diffusion coefficients of tubulin
oligomers determined by FCS in the presence of Mg2+ and
Flutax2. These values are still higher than the values for
tubulin rings 4.9 3 10^-12 m^2/s (Palmer et al., 1982)
measured by a quasielastic laser light scattering.

The expected diffusion constant of the tubulin dimer is
estimated from the Svedberg equation (Gelbert et al., 1977)
to be 4.7 3 10^-11 m^2/s. Using laser light scattering
a diffusion coefficient of 4.1 3 10^-11 m^2/s is found, which
is very close. The diffusion coefficient of fluorescent BSA
with molecular mass of 65 kD is determined to be (5.1 6 0.3)
3 10^-11 m^2/s. Therefore, in our investigations the highest
value of the diffusion coefficient of tubulin can be attributed
to dimeric tubulin with molecular mass of 100 kD, showing
that tubulin is not dissociated into monomers at nanomolar
concentrations. These results are in agreement with the
finding by Caplow and Fee (2002) of a dissociation constant
of 10^-11 M for tubulin dimers determined by surface
plasmon resonance.

All measurements with tubulin are done after cold
centrifugation at 4°C for 20 min to remove aggregates of
tubulin. The analytical ultracentrifugation is also done to
prove that no oligomers are previously present in the
preparation of tubulin. The labeled tubulin is also measured
at its concentrations varying between 2 nM and 10 nM and in
the presence of nonlabeled tubulin. No significant differ-
ences are obtained in the diffusion coefficient and this proves
the absence of tendency of labeled tubulin to aggregate at
low Mg2+ and nonassembly conditions.

We also studied the diffusion of fluorescent paclitaxel.
The main conclusion of this work is that at nanomolar
concentration of fluorescent paclitaxel is able to recruit
tubulin dimers, leading to the formation of tubulin oligomers
with a finite size.

Fluorescent derivatives of paclitaxel have already been
studied by several authors. Some of them preferentially bind
to microtubules, others to the unpolymerized, dimeric form.
In our investigations we found evidence for the interaction of
Flutax2 with tubulin in the dimeric state, already at tubulin
concentrations of 0.25 mM. The diffusion coefficient of this
complex is determined to be (4.1 6 0.3) 3 10^-11 m^2/s, which
is very close to the diffusion coefficient of the tubulin dimer.
With increasing concentration of tubulin the diffusion coefficient
decreases down to (1.6 6 0.3) 3 10^-11 m^2/s indicating the
formation of tubulin oligomers around the Flutax2 molecules.

We found no binding of Flutax2 to microtubules
preformed in the presence of excess paclitaxel, showing
that the Flutax2 binding site is not available on paclitaxel-
saturated microtubules. But FCS measurements show the
incorporation of Flutax2 in microtubules, when tubulin-
Flutax2 oligomers are preformed and microtubules are
induced by addition of paclitaxel (close to stoichiometric
amounts). These results suggest that preformed tubulin-
Flutax2 oligomers are incorporated into microtubules and
might be preferential nucleation sites.

A sharp decrease of the average diffusion coefficient of the
tubulin-Flutax2 complex upon addition of micromolar
concentrations of tubulin (Fig. 4) and the deviation from
linearity near the beginning of the binding plot (Fig. 7)
probably indicate that tubulin has a high affinity for Flutax2
and that the binding of further tubulin molecules to this
complex decreases in affinity upon increasing the size of the
oligomers. This type of assembly of tubulin oligomers
induced by nanomolar concentration of Flutax2 is different
from the open assembly that occurs in the presence of high
concentration of Mg2+. This behavior is suggestive of a
mechanism of cumulative strain, where successive associa-
tion steps occur with decreasing affinity, a process that is
formally similar to what happens in many in self-assembly
(Davis, 1981) and that explains the finite size of the oligomers.

Biophysical Journal 87(4) 2635–2646
```