```plaintext
rIFN-γ IN CANCER PATIENTS

The effect of i.m. and i.v. bolus administration of rIFN-γ on 
absolute granulocyte counts is shown in Chart 4. Minimal effects 
were observed after i.v. bolus rIFN-γ regardless of the dose 
level. In contrast, a substantial decrease in absolute granulocyte 
counts was seen starting at rIFN-γ doses of 0.05 mg/sq m given 
by the i.m. route. However, increasing the dose level did not 
significantly increase the degree of granulocytopenia, with a 
median decrement in granulocytes of 30% at a dose of 0.05 mg/ 
sq m and 37% at 2.5 mg/sq m. The lowest granulocyte counts 
were generally reached at 24 h, and recovery to base line 
occurred within 48 to 72 h after i.m. injection. Lymphocyte and 
platelet counts were unaffected by treatment. Hematocrit values 
showed a median drop of 7% over the 4-week study period, 
which was most likely due to phlebotomy requirements. Liver 
and renal function tests remained unchanged throughout the 
study except for a moderate increase in serum glutamic oxal- 
oacetic transaminase to 229 units/ml in one patient which oc- 
curred in association with radiologically documented infarction 
of hepatic metastases. This value returned to normal 2 weeks 
after discontinuation of rIFN-γ. Antibodies against rIFN-γ were 
not detected in any patient.

Two of 10 patients in this study showed objective evidence of 
tumor regression. One patient with nodular poorly differentiated 
lymphocytic lymphoma achieved a minor response with disap- 
pearance of peripheral adenopathy, a <50% decrease in retro- 
peritoneal adenopathy, and a decrease in lymphocytic infiltrate 
of the bone marrow from 32 to 18%. The other patient who had 
metastatic sarcoma previously treated with multiple chemother- 
apeutic agents, including an Adriamycin-containing regimen and 
4 investigational agents, achieved a complete regression 
of lung nodules. After treatment was interrupted for approxi- 
mately 3 weeks, the patient's disease progressed in spite of 
reinitiation of therapy.

DISCUSSION

IFN-γ is a T-cell-derived lymphokine with the ability to function 
as a differentiation factor, an antiviral agent, an antiproliferative 
agent, an immune regulator with potent macrophage-activating 
effects, and as an antimicrobial agent against intracellular pro- 
tozoa and bacteria (14, 16-18, 26-28). This unusually broad 
spectrum of biological activities suggests a potential therapeutic 
role for this material in patients with cancer, viral diseases, and 
opportunistic infections. To date, reported clinical studies of IFN- 
γ have been limited to preliminary pharmacokinetic evaluation of 
native IFN-γ which was available in limited amounts and was 
only approximately 40% pure (20, 21). However, recently, syn- 
thesis of human IFN-γ in E. coli using recombinant DNA tech- 
nology has been achieved (22). In contrast to the α-interferons 
which have at least 12 different genetic loci (29), there appears 
to be only one gene coding for human IFN-γ (30). The material 
used in this study was genetically engineered to have 143 amino 
acids, identical in sequence to native IFN-γ except for a methi- 
onine residue at the N-terminal (23). Preclinical testing has dem- 
onstrated that synthetic IFN-γ is biologically active. The major 
aims of this study were to ascertain the pharmacokinetics, single- 
dose tolerance, and biological effects of rIFN-γ in patients with 
disseminated cancer.

The pharmacological parameters of rIFN-γ when measured by 
ELISA and by bioassay after i.v. bolus administration were similar 

Chart 3. Serum disappearance of rIFN-γ after i.m. administration as measured 
by ELISA. Points, mean of blood levels for each dose for all patients at that dose; 
bars, SE.

Chart 4. Granulocyte counts after i.m. and i.v. bolus administration of rIFN-γ. 
Columns, median of the granulocyte count observed 24 h after injection of inter- 
feron, expressed as a percentage of the base-line counts; bars, range.

CANCER RESEARCH VOL. 45 JUNE 1985
2869
```