```plaintext
ARTICLES                                                                                     NATURE|Vol 453|1 May 2008

a       β1      β2      β3      β7      αL      αM      αX      α4      α5      α6      αv      α4      α5      α6      αv

WT      DC

Itg-/-   DC

b

c

Figure 1 | Migration of integrin-deficient dendritic cells into lymph nodes.
a, Flow cytometric analysis of integrin subunits of wild-type (WT) and integrin-deficient (Itg-/-) dendritic cells (DCs) (integrin, unshaded; isotype control, grey-shaded; b, c, In vivo migration of DCs after subcutaneous injection into hind footpads of WT mice. At the time points indicated, arrival of differentially labelled DCs in the lymph node was analysed.
b, Localization of DCs after 48 h. Composite of six separate images of a single lymph node. Scale bar, 200 µm. B, B-cell follicle; T, T-cell cortex.
c, Quantitative histology. Dotted line at 0.5, 50% of DCs that migrated into the lymph node are knockout DCs; Tln1, talin1. Red dots indicate single experiments (1 lymph node); box shows median, 25%, 75% percentiles; whiskers show minimum, maximum.

(Supplementary Fig. 4a). The interaction of talin with integrin cytoplasmic domains is required for integrin clustering, ligand binding and coupling of F-actin to adhesion sites41. Accordingly, talin1 gene ablation in DCs did not affect the levels of integrin expression, but completely abolished their ability to bind ligands (Supplementary Fig. 4b–d). Again, arrival of talin1-/- DCs in lymph nodes did not significantly differ from wild-type DCs (Fig. 1c).

To allow for a detailed comparison of the cellular dynamics of wild-type and integrin-/- DCs within the different physiological environments of the migration route, we employed two in situ imaging approaches (Fig. 2). Representing the starting point of DC migration, the interstitial space of the dermis is dominated by fibrillar arrays of collagen bundles42. Using a newly developed set-up of ex vivo live cell imaging with explanted ear dermis, we could directly visualize DCs moving towards and entering the afferent lymphatic vessels by wide-field microscopy (Fig. 2b, c, Supplementary Fig. 5). Single cell tracking revealed no difference in the migratory behaviour of wild-type, integrin-/- and talin1-/- DCs (Fig. 2c, d).

The lymph node constitutes a fundamentally different environment for cellular migration, as it contains almost no freely accessible extracellular matrix molecules but is densely packed with lymphocytes and stroma cells13,14. To analyse the dynamics of intranodal DC migration from the subcapsular sinus towards the T-cell area, we employed a set-up of intravital two-photon microscopy of the popliteal lymph nodes15. Evaluating a range of motility parameters, including cell velocity, directional persistence, mean square displacement, motility coefficients and morphology, we found that the movement behaviour of wild-type and integrin-/- DCs was indistinguishable (Fig. 2e, f, Supplementary Videos 1–3, data not shown).

2D but not 3D migration is integrin-dependent.
On their way to the lymph node, DCs do not cross significant tissue barriers, such as continuous endothelial or epithelial linings13. As these processes have been shown to be integrin-dependent4, we also tested for extravasation of integrin-/- leukocytes from the blood stream into the dermis and found that it was indeed abolished (Fig. 2g, Supplementary Fig. 6). This finding corroborates the concept that the shear forces imposed by the blood flow8. In line with this in vivo finding, we found that integrin-/- DCs were entirely unable to adhere and migrate on two-dimensional (2D) substrates. Gravity was obviously not sufficient to confine the non-adherent cells to planar surfaces and allow the transduction of the traction forces

Interstitial migration within skin and entry into lymphatics

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

LV

LN

B

T

Extravasion from blood vessel

Migration within lymph node

Figure 2 | Integrin-independent interstitial leukocyte migration in vivo. a, Scheme of the dendritic cell (DC) migratory path from the skin via lymphatic vessels to the lymph node. B, B-cell follicle; BV, blood vessel; D, dermis; E, epidermis; LN, lymph node; LV, lymphatic vessel; T, T-cell cortex.
b–d, Migration of DCs within the dermis of ear explants. b, Tracks of DCs (red) entering LYVE-1+ LVs (green). c, Confocal images of whole mount ear explants 2 h after addition of DCs (red). DCs locate within the lumen of LVs; all scale bars, 50 µm.
d, Speed and directional persistence (DP, mean ± s.d.) of single cells (dots) for wild-type (WT), integrin-/- (Itg-/-) and talin1-/- (Tln1-/-) DCs. Red line, mean. e, f, Intravital two-photon microscopy. e, 3D tracking of WT (green, blue line) and Itg-/- (red, yellow line) DCs migrating in the interfollicular areas.
f, Quantification of the average speed and DP (mean ± s.d.) of tracked single cells (dots). Red line, mean.
g, Quantification of granulocytes that extravasated from blood into ear dermis (n = 6 for each mouse line). Red line, mean. *P < 0.05 (post hoc).

52                                                                                           ©2008 Nature Publishing Group
```