```plaintext
ARTICLES                                                                                                      NATURE|Vol 453|1 May 2008

(Fig. 4b–e, Supplementary Fig. 8b–d, Supplementary Video 9). This 
functional dissociation between front and back caused up to 30-fold 
cell elongation, and demonstrates that the leading edge migrates 
autonomously and without a need for receptor-mediated coupling 
of contractile forces to the extracellular matrix.

Trailing edge contraction propels the nucleus
How does trailing edge contraction contribute to cell body loco-
motion? In fibroblasts and leukocytes moving on 2D substrates, 
actomyosin contraction at the back is required to disassemble recep-
tor binding-sites and subsequently retract the membrane21,22. 
Hence, blocking contraction causes membrane tethers at the trailing 
edge. Consistent with an adhesion-independent migration mode, we 
could not observe membrane tethers in myosin II-inhibited leuko-
cytes migrating in 3D gels. We considered that the elongated pheno-
type with its rounded back was caused by the inability to move an 

internal resistance through narrow gaps within the gel. As the nucleus 
is the least elastic cellular compartment23, we visualized DNA within 
chemotaxing DCs and granulocytes. In untreated cells, we observed 
continuous shape changes of nuclei, indicating deformation forces, 
while upon myosin II inhibition, spherical nuclei were immobilized 
at the rear ends of the cells (Figs 4d, e, Supplementary Fig. 8b–d, 
Supplementary Videos 10, 11).

Protrusion drives basal locomotion
Although ‘locked’ nuclei caused migration arrest in most cells, a few 
still showed locomotion. This residual migration was often charac-
terized by cell body elongation and dragging of the nucleus (Fig. 5a, 
Supplementary Video 12). Such non-contractile movement was in 
line with our previous observations showing motile phases in the 
absence of trailing edge contractions. We hypothesized that such 
myosin II-independent migration might occur in areas of the col-
lagen gel where external resistance was low due to increased spacing 
of the collagen fibres. To establish the relationship between internal 
contractile forces and external resistance, we analysed DC chemotaxis 
in collagen gels of varying fibre spacing (Fig. 5b). In all collagen 
densities, myosin II-inhibited DCs were slower than untreated cells 
but importantly, they ‘caught up’ at lowest gel densities (Fig. 5b, 
Supplementary Video 13). A comparison of instantaneous velocities 
further showed that myosin II inhibition did not prevent DCs from 
reaching the same peak values as untreated cells (Supplementary 
Fig. 9a–c).

We conclude that, in contrast to the ‘blebbing’ model of amoeboid 
cell migration24, cortical actomyosin contraction does not mediate 
locomotion itself but rather facilitates a protrusive mode of migra-
tion in confined environments where protrusion alone is unable to 
overcome external resistance. This protrusive movement is driven 
by actin polymerization at the leading edge and is independent of 
density by contraction (myosin II). Contractile force deforms the 
nucleus and facilitates a purely protrusive mode of migration.

To challenge the concept of protrusive movement, we treated 
migrating DCs with latrunculin B, which interferes with actin poly-
merization by depolymerizing the pool of available G-actin 
monomers25. We found that this treatment reduced cell migration 
velocity in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 5c). At intermediate con-
centrations, the trailing edge remained fixed while the nucleus 
was ‘pushed’ to the cell front (Fig. 5d, Supplementary Video 14). 
Consistent with a model where protrusion determines the speed of 
cell migration while contraction is only activated to overcome 
external resistances, the speed reduction of latrunculin B-treated cells 
was independent of gel density (Fig. 5b, c).

Discussion
We show that leukocytes migrate in the absence of specific adhesive 
interactions with the extracellular environment. This subversion of 
the metazoan principle makes them autonomous from the tissue 
context, and allows them to quickly and flexibly navigate through 
any organ without adaptations to alternating extracellular ligands. 
This strategy is in stark contrast to the haptokinetic migration prin-
ciple that leads along predefined pathways and therefore promotes 
deterministic positioning. Adhesion independency bestows stochas-
tic movement or chemotaxis where cells randomly migrate or fol-
low soluble cues. Astonishingly, the protrusive flow of F-actin 
appears sufficient to drive rapid leukocyte locomotion in environ-
ments with large pore-size. This resembles the locomotion princi-
ple of nematode sperm cells that is entirely driven by treadmilling 
polymers of major sperm protein26. Only in narrow areas do leukocytes 
activate their contractile module to squeeze and propel the internal 
resistance of the nucleus in a manner resembling neuronal 
nucleokinesis27. This ‘flowing and squeezing’ migration model 
fulfils a central requirement for immune cell movement: the perice-
llular environment is transiently remodelled but never digested28 or 

Figure 5 | Myosin II-independent protrusive migration of dendritic cells. 
a, Two types of residual migration of wild-type (WT) dendritic cells (DCs) 
treated with blebbistatin in a standard 3D collagen gel. DCs either drag the 
nucleus behind with elongated appearance and low speed (right column) or 
appear morphologically normal with high speed (left column). Time in min. 
b, Top panel, confocal reflection microscopy of 3D collagen networks of 
different densities. Lower panels, velocities of single chemotaxing WT DCs 
(black) in collagen gels with varying densities. Upper graph, no inhibitor; red 
line, mean. Middle graph, blebbistatin; red line, median. Bottom graph, 
100 nM latrunculin B (partial actin depolymerization); red line, median 
c, Velocity of single WT DCs (dots) in the presence of different concentrations 
of latrunculin B (1.6 mg ml21 collagen); red line, median. In b and c, *P < 0.05 
(post hoc). d, Time-lapse sequence of a 100 nM latrunculin B-treated WT DC; 
DIC microscopy, nuclei (green). Time, mins. Blue boxes (b in and b) highlight 
experimental conditions that were used for follow-up experiments indicated 
by the arrow. Scale bars: 10 mm (a, d), 50 mm (b).

54                                                                                      ©2008 Nature Publishing Group
```