```plaintext
letters to nature

cells spontaneously produced IL-2 (18.6%) and IFN-γ (18.8%) at 
20 h, and most secreted cytokines after brief restimulation (Fig. 3b). 
Almost all T cells expressed abundant activation markers, including 
CD25, but no cells had divided. The frequency of T-cell–DC 
interactions in phase two is consistent with the formation of a 
mature synapse-like contact zone18. Recent studies on CD4+ T-cell 
interactions with DCs in excised LNs found that at 23 h after T-cell 
transfer the salmonella CD34 was excluded from the contact zone of 
interacting cells, implying the formation of a synapse-like interface19. 
However, this study imaged T cells in the superficial cortex where 
they formed only one-to-one associations with DCs. In the present 
analysis of the deep paracortex we frequently observed several T cells 
engulfing against the same DC (Supplementary Information 9).

The formation of CD8+ T-cell clusters around single DCs was 
also detected in explanted LNs that were imaged 20 h after T-cell 
transfer7. Consistent with T-cell–DC behaviour during phase two 
in vivo was the observation that conjugates in excised LNs were 
stable, whereas interactions without antigen were short-lived7. 
Clustering of antigen-specific CD4+ T cells around DCs in LNs 
was also observed histologically20–23. Because these observations 
indicated that CD4+ and CD8+ T cells might behave similarly 
in vivo, we performed experiments with DO11.10 T cells expressing 
a MHC class-II restricted TCR24. T cells formed stable clusters with 
peptide-pulsed DCs when observed at 10 h, but engaged preferen-
tially in short contacts at 3 and 47 h after injection (Supplementary 
Information 11), indicating that the three-phase model also applies 
to CD4+ T cells.

Whereas there began a delay for marking, T cells dissociated from 
DCs, migrated rapidly and proliferated vigorously. Dividing T cells 
expressed CD25 and CD69, but remained CD44high (Fig. 3c). 
During the first 24 h, the number of T cells in the LN increased 
by a factor of 2, the actual number of intranodal TCR transcribing 
cells was higher, because T cells divided up to five times during 
the preceding day and kept proliferating thereafter, resulting in the 
dilution of carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE) to 
undetectable concentrations (not shown). T cells engaged in 
brief contacts with DCs at 44–48 h, but the relevance of these 
interactions is uncertain, because it is possible that DCs retained 
little or no peptide antigen at this time point (more than 60 h after 
DC injection).

Even when DCs did not present antigen, T cells underwent 
prolonged interactions during the 8–12 h interval, whereas earlier 
and later contacts were short-lived (Fig. 3b). This indicates that 
recruiting T cells follow a three-phase itinerary by default when 
they survey lymphoid tissues. Without antigen, phase two is 
abbreviated, and although T-cell–DC contacts are shorter than in 
the presence of antigen, they are still longer than in phase one. T-cell 
contacts without CD3 do not result in detectable changes in 
activation markers (Fig. 3g) or cytokine production (not shown). 
Nevertheless, TCR signalling probably occurred, because naive T 
cells in LNs contain partly phosphorylated CD3ζ, even in the 
absence of antigen, whereas blood-borne T cells do not carry this 
indicator of early TCR signalling25. Antigen-independent TCR 
stimulation in LNs depends on self-MHC molecules and facilitates 
T-cell responses to foreign antigens26.

The intermittent period of antigen-independent, prolonged 
contacts might be indicative of physiological self-MHC recognition. 
If T cells fail to perceive an activating signal, even during this phase 
when they scrutinize DCs most intensely, they might be prompted to 
seek another lymphoid tissue. The three-phase itinerary might be 
aborted. There might signify their search for an exit into lymph 
sinuses. Indeed, most lymphocytes appear in thoracic duct lymph 
34–48 h after intravenous bolus injection27. Accordingly, we found 
that after anti-1L-selectin treatment the number of homed T cells in 
LNs that did not contain antigen pulsed DCs remained initially 
constant. But there was a 60% decrease between 20 and 44 h (not 
shown). Recirculating lymphocytes therefore spend just enough 

time in LNs to go through all three phases before leaving through 
efferent lymphatics.

It will be important to determine the mechanisms that cause the 
transition from one phase to the next. Although this could involve 
changes in both T cells and DCs, several observations indicate 
that adaptive T-cell responses might be chiefly responsible. T-cell 
velocity and motility were dependent on antigens and paralleled the 
differential dynamics of conjugate formation, whereas DC motility 
gradually declined by default and was minimally affected by antigen 
presentation. During the transition period before and after phase 
two, numerous DCs interacted stably with some T cells and 
simultaneously engaged in brief contacts with others (Supplemen-
tary Information 10). If contact duration was determined by DCs, 
then individual DCs should support either brief encounters or 
stable conjugation, but not both. Moreover, when T-cell dwell time 
was not synchronized by anti-L-selectin, stable contacts were 
prominent at 10 h after T-cell injection, but short-lasting contacts 
were more frequent than after treatment with antibody, presumably 
owing to recirculating immigrants displaying phase-one-like behaviour 
(Supplementary Information 11, 12).

How do intranodal T cells keep track of time and what are the 
immunological consequences of each interactive phase? In vitro, 
T cells can integrate multiple brief signals to reach a threshold for 
full-fledged activation11,12. Conceivably, this is how T cells gather 
information from DCs during phase two. However, the ability of 
in vitro primed CD8+ T cells to secrete IL-2 and to exert effector 
activities after adoptive transfer depends on the formation of stable 
T-cell–DC conjugates and the duration of T-cell stimulation, 
respectively27,28. Thus, phase two interactions might also be impor-
tant for the progressive increase of T-cell priming by DCs occupi-
ed in stable conjugates, whereas brief contacts might be important 
for the recruitment of naive T cells.

Methods

Mice

Female BALB/c, C57BL/6 and congenic C57BL/6 (CD45.1) mice were purchased from 
Jackson Laboratories and used at the age of 12 weeks. DO11.10 and P14 mice, which 
carry a transgenic TCR specific for OVA323–339 and LCMV gp33–41 in H-2d, 
respectively, were obtained from Jackson Laboratories. All experiments were 
performed in accordance with National Institute of Health guidelines approved by the 
Committee on Animal Care at both Harvard Medical School and the CBR 
Institute for Biomedical Research.

Reagents

OVA323–339 peptide (ISQAVHAAHAEINEAGR) was a gift from H. Ploegh. LCMV 
gp33–41 peptide (KAVYNFATC) was purchased from Biosource. Anti-L-selectin 
antibody (clone Mel-14) was grown and purified according to standard procedures. 
All other monoclonal antibodies were from BD Pharmingen.

Cells

DCs were immunomagnetically purified (95% CD11c+) from spleens of donor mice that 
had been implanted with a FL-st secreting mouse melanoma cell line as described29. 
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells from LN and spleen of DO11.10 and P14 mice were purified by 
negative immunomagnetic cell sorting (Miltenyi Biotec). Purity was typically more than 
90%.

Flow cytometry

Phenotypic characterization of DCs and T cells was performed on a FACSCalibur (Becton 
Dickinson). The secretion of IL-2 and IFN-γ was measured by surface capture (Miltenyi 
Biotec). For restimulation, T cells were incubated for 3 h with 10 mg ml–1 gp33–41 peptide 
or 1 mg ml–1 in medium at 37 °C containing 10% mouse serum. For the measurement 
of spontaneous cytokine release, antigenic peptide was omitted. Phorbolmyristate-bu-
tyrate (PMA) plus ionomycin (4–6) or PE-KAVYNFATC specific for the P14 TCR 
(Beckman Coulter) was used to assess TCR expression on adoptively transferred T cells. 
T-cell proliferation was assessed by CFSE dilution.

Intravital two-photon microscopy

DCs were pulsed with gp33–41 peptide or OVA323–339 or with medium as control, and 
labelled for 15 min at 37 °C with 10 mM 5-(and 6)-{4,4-difluoro-5,7-dimethyl-4-bora-
3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene-3-propionyl} methylester (Molecular Probes). 5 x 105 TDCs in 100 ml RPMI 
containing 10 mg of LPS (Sigma) were injected i.p. the following morning. T cells were 
labelled for 15 min at 37 °C with 5-(and 6)-{5-(and 6)-{5-chloromethylfluorescein 
diacetate (CMFDA, Molecular Probes) and 5–10 x 106 cells were given to recipients by 
intravenous injection. For details of the microscope, see ref. 2 and b, animals were anaesthetized 
```