```plaintext
letters to nature

marked change in T-cell–DC conjugation was apparent when LNs 
were imaged at 8–12 h (Supplementary Information 9). Most 
conjugates with antigen-presenting DCs lasted longer than 30 min 
(86%), and the majority (64%) remained stable throughout the 
60 min observation period. We followed single conjugates over up 
to 3 h, indicating that these interactions can be sustained for a 
substantial period. Prolonged interactions were still apparent at 
20–26 h, but about 70% of the contacts had returned to short 
encounter mode. One day later (44–48 h), T cells engaged in brief 
contacts only (Supplementary Information 4).

These observations indicate that naive CD8 T cells interacted 
with antigen-presenting DCs in three sequential stages. Phase one 
constituted the first approximately 8 h after T-cell entry into LNs 
and was characterized by short encounters of rapidly migrating cells 
with numerous DCs, preferentially in the vicinity of HEVs. By 
contrast, in vitro stimulation of TCRs on T cells migrating on two- 
dimensional surfaces provides an immediate stop signal followed by 
assembly of the so-called supramolecular activation cluster or 
immunological synapse at the contact site17–19. The formation of 
mature synapses between naive T cells and antigen-presenting cells 
requires about 30 min (ref. 20). It is controversial whether and when 
immunological synapses form in vivo and whether they are required 
for T-cell activation. For example, T-cell–DC interactions in col- 
lagen matrices last only minutes but induce T-cell activation21. 
Given the short duration of contacts during phase one, it is unlikely 
that mature immunological synapses could have formed. Never- 
theless, in contrast with LNs that did not receive DCs, T cells in DC- 
containing LNs upregulated CD44 and CD69 during the first 8 h 

![Image of graphs and plots]

Figure 2 Effect of antigen on T-cell motility in LNs. a, Intranodal T cell migrating between 
tetramethylrhodamine b-isothiocyanate–dextran-filled capillaries in the absence of 
transferred DCs (see also Supplementary Information 7). Scale bar, 20 mm. b, Two- 
dimensional (left; scale bar, 20 mm) and 3D (right; grid squares are 15.4 mm x 15.4 mm) 
depiction of representative T-cell tracks. c, d, Representative frequency histograms of 3D 
instantaneous velocities (upper panels) and turning angles (lower panels) of T cells 
migrating in the absence (c) or presence (d) of LPS-matured DCs. Arrows in the upper 
panels indicate medians (8.9 mm min-1 in c; 8.3 mm min-1 in d). e, Mean displacement 
plots of T cells in the absence (blue) or presence (green) of LPS-matured DCs in LNs. 
f, Time course of T-cell motility coefficients in the presence of control DCs (open circles) 
and antigen-bearing DCs (filled circles). Triangle denotes T-cell motility coefficient without 
DC injection. g, 3D instantaneous velocity histograms of T cells in representative LNs at 
various times after adoptive transfer in the presence of antigen-pulsed (filled bars) or 
control (open bars) DCs. Medians are indicated by arrows; values shown are in units of 
mm min-1.

156

©2004 Nature Publishing Group

NATURE | VOL 427 | 8 JANUARY 2004 | www.nature.com/nature
```