```plaintext
letters to nature

Acknowledgements The authors thank S. L. Opitz, N. Watson and E. Dikovaia for technical 
support; K. Hoeffelinger and T. Foltz for assistance with intravital lymphocyte injection and 
W. Lenski for critical revisions of the manuscript. This work was supported by grants from the 
National Institutes of Health, the National Science Foundation Biotechnology Process 
Engineering Center, and the Dutch Cancer Society Koningin Wilhelmina fonds. G.Q.D. is a 
Birnbaum Scholar of the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society of America. J.G. was sponsored by the 
Human Frontier Science Foundation. K.E. is a Junior Fellow in the Harvard Society of Fellows.

Competing interests statement The authors declare that they have no competing financial 
interests.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to G.Q.D. 
(george.daley@childrens.harvard.edu).

T-cell priming by dendritic 
cells in lymph nodes occurs 
in three distinct phases

Thorsten R. Mempel, Sarah E. Henrickson & Ulrich H. von Andrian

The CBR Institute for Biomedical Research, Department of Pathology, 
Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, 
USA

Primary T-cell responses in lymph nodes (LNs) require contact- 
dependent information exchange between T cells and dendritic 
cells (DCs). To examine the dynamics of T-cell priming in 
normal LNs, the resident lymphocyte pool is composed of non- 
synchronised populations of different dwell times that display het- 
erogeneous behaviour in mouse LNs in vivo. Here we use 
two-photon microscopy in vivo to study antigen-presenting DCs 
and T cells whose dwell time in LNs was synchronized. 
During the first 8 h after entering the blood, T cells under- 
went multiple short encounters with DCs, progressively 
decreased their motility, and upregulated activation markers. 
During the subsequent 12 h T cells formed long-lasting stable 
conjugates with DCs and began to secrete interleukin-2 and 
interferon-g. On the second day, coinciding with the onset of 
proliferation, T cells resumed their rapid migration and other 
actions. Thus, T-cell priming by DCs occurs in three successive 
stages: transient serial encounters during the first activation 
phase are followed by a second phase of stable contact culminat- 
ing in cytokine production, which makes a transition into a third 
phase of high motility and rapid proliferation.

Naive T cells recirculate continually between the blood and LNs 
for antigen search1. The intranodal encounter of a peptide–major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC) complex that is recognized by a 
T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) will only result in full-fledged T cell 
activation upon co-stimulation provided by mature DCs. These 
professional antigen-presenting cells collect antigens in peripheral 
tissues and migrate to LNs through lymph vessels. T-cell priming by 
DCs induces activation markers, cytokine secretion, and prolifer- 
ation. Several reports have analysed the dynamics of T-cell–DC 
interactions in excised LNs, but methods and results have been 
variable and it is unknown how the absence of lymph and blood 
flow or environment influences T-cell–DC interactions2. There is 
therefore still no comprehensive description of what happens in a 
physiological setting when naive T cells enter LNs that contain 
antigen-presenting DCs.

We have used two-photon microscopy3 to study lymphocyte 
migration and interactions with DCs within popliteal LNs of 
anaesthetized mice. Our preparation preserved physiological 
blood and lymph flow4, whereas, in our hands, lymph flow was 

compromised when we attempted to adapt the well-established 
inguinal lymph-node preparation to two-photon imaging5 (not 
shown). Recipient mice received footpad injections of fluorescent 
DCs, which entered lymph vessels and accumulated in the popliteal 
LN during the following day. Differentially tagged TCR transgenic 
CD8+ T cells were injected intravenously 18 h later (Fig. 1a). T cells 
homed rapidly through high endothelial venules (HEVs) into 
popliteal LNs, where they constituted 1–2% of all CD8+ cells 2 h 
after injection. At this point, further lymphocyte homing was 
blocked by the injection of anti-L-selectin6. This ensured that all 
imaged T cells had entered popliteal LNs during the initial 2-h 
window and enabled us to study synchronized resident cells during 
the subsequent 2 days.

Initially, we examined the phenotype of injected DCs that 
migrated to draining LNs (Fig. 1b). Immature splenic CD11c+ 
DCs from CD45.1+ donors were injected into CD45.2+ congenic 
recipients. Because immature DCs express little or no CCR7—a 
chemokine receptor required for DC migration into lymphatics and 
within LNs7—we co-injected lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a stimulus 
which induces DC maturation and CCR7 expression8. Conse- 
quently, DCs recovered from popliteal LNs were mature and either 
CD11b+CD8a+ or CD11b+CD8a–. CD8a–high input DCs were 
rarely detected in LNs. This might reflect an inability of CD8a–high 
DCs to migrate to LNs, or the downregulation of CD8a during 
transit.

To examine DCs in situ, we administered footpad injections of 
red fluorescent DCs and analysed their behaviour within popliteal 
LNs. After 20 h a fraction of DCs (about 20–50%) resided 
in the subcapsular sinus and the superficial cortex. The remainder 
congregated in distinct regions within the deep cortex, where they 
were closely aligned to T cell clusters (Fig. 1c). This arrangement 
was consistent with the notion that DCs are retained by 
the non-uniform distribution of DCs in the deep cortex became 
apparent after fluorescence-based extraction from thick 
lymph-node vessels. In line with recent observations13, many 
DCs lined up around HEVs in strategic positions to interact with 
newly homed T cells (Supplementary Fig. 1b; Supplementary 
Information 2, 3). This distribution pattern became less apparent 
day 2 or 3 after injection (Supplementary Information 4).

One day after injection, DCs in T-cell areas were more 
motile, whether they presented antigen to T cells or not (Fig. 1c–g; 
Supplementary Information 5). The median three-dimensional 
(3D) instantaneous velocity was 6.6 mm min–1 (Fig. 1e), which 
is in good agreement with measurements of three-dimensional veloc- 
ities in explanted LNs9. Individual DCs followed random paths 
without apparent directional bias. Even sessile DCs constantly 
extended and retracted dendrites and pseudopods. The motility of 
both antigen-pulsed and control DCs was highest between 2 and 8 h 
after T-cell transfer (20–26 h after DC injection) and decreased over 
time (Fig. 1f, g; Supplementary Information 5). This progressive 
decrease in motility might reflect DC 'exhaustion', which has been 
proposed to occur after LPS activation14.

Migratory dynamics in LNs were closely dependent on physio- 
logical conditions: T cells and DCs stopped migrating and assumed 
a round shape within minutes after cardiovascular arrest (Sup- 
plementary Information 6), even in a tissue temperature main- 
tained at 36 °C, a requirement for interstitial T-cell migration15. In 
animals without DC injection, intranodal T cells moved 
rapidly, reaching peak 3D velocities of 10.0 mm min–1 (Fig. 2a–c; 
Supplementary Information 7). In LNs draining DC-injected foot- 
pads, 3D velocities were equivalent (Fig. 2c, d) but T cells turned at 
steeper angles and covered a smaller volume of the paracortex, 
resulting in decreased motility coefficients, even when DCs carried 
no antigen (Fig. 2e, f). Mean T-cell displacement plots in the 
antigen-containing LNs revealed a plateau at about 15 mm displace- 
ment (Fig. 2e), indicating that, although T cells, thus, DC pulses 
interactions induced LN paracortex partitioning into smaller com- 
partments in which incoming T cells were retained, perhaps owing 
```