```plaintext
General Thoracic Surgery                                                                                   Merritt et al

GTS

A. Tumor Area                                         B. Survival
150
                                                                                     100
125
                                                                                      80
100
                                                                                      60
 75
                                                                                      40
 50
                                                                                      20
 25
                                                                                       0
  0
     0   5   10   15   20   25                                                        0    20    40    60    80   100
        Days after tumor initiation                                                        Days after tumor initiation

Figure 6. A single dose of rmIFNγ enhances the antitumor effect and cure rate obtained with intratumoral injection
of AdCD40L. Twelve days after B16.F10 flank tumor initiation, C57BL/6 mice were randomized to 6 groups: AdCD40L
plus IP rmIFNγ (n = 6); AdCD40L alone (n = 6); AdNull plus IP rmIFNγ (n = 6); AdNull alone (n = 5); IP rmIFNγ
alone (n = 5); or PBS (n = 5). All vectors were administered intratumorally (5 × 10^9 particle units/100 μL of PBS),
and rmIFNγ (5000 U) was administered concomitantly with the adenovirus vectors. The tumor area was assessed
at 2- to 3-day intervals with microcalipers. The data points represent the mean tumor area ± SEM. The mice were
killed when the largest tumor diameter reached 15 mm. A, Tumor area. B, Survival. The arrows indicate the day
of treatment.

lation, these T cells are then able to differentiate into tumor-
specific CTLs, proliferate, and circulate throughout the
body. In this regard, AdCD40L is an adenovirus gene trans-
fer vector encoding the murine CD40 ligand cDNA and has
been demonstrated to augment the efferent limb of the
antitumor immune response by generating tumor-specific
CTLs when administered intratumorally in mice, resulting
in regression of established tumors.11 Tumor regression and
cure rates are limited, however, when this vector is used to
treat murine tumors that express little or no MHC class I
(eg, B16.F10).11 As a strategy to augment the antitumor
effect of AdCD40L when used to treat MHC class I–defi-
cient tumors, we sought to up-regulate MHC class I expres-
sion on established tumors in vivo using rmIFNγ, a cytokine
known to modulate MHC class I expression by many tumor
cell types in vitro.8,10,26 Interestingly, only a single dose of
systemic rmIFNγ was necessary to markedly enhance MHC
class I expression by established B16.F10 tumors in vivo.
Furthermore, the data show that the same dose of rmIFNγ
had virtually no antitumor effect or CTL-generating ability
on its own in this model. When combined with AdCD40L,
however, rmIFNγ induced pronounced augmentation of
both the antitumor response and cure rate, as well as CTL
generation induced by this vector. The observation that
intratumoral injection of a class I antibody partially abro-
gated the CTL response in this model suggests that the class
I–modulating properties of IFNγ are responsible for its
synergistic effects. However, this direct cause-and-effect
relationship cannot be stated with certainty as CD40 ligation
itself has been shown to up-regulate class I expression on
some carcinomas.27 Complete abrogation was not observed

in this experiment most likely because the antibody was
administered only on 3 days, allowing the synergistic anti-
tumor effects of IFNγ to emerge by the time the spleens
were harvested for the ELISPOT assay (7 days posttreat-
ment). Only 3 doses of antibody were used for these experi-
ments for 2 reasons. First is the high cost of the antibody.
Second, in the tumor size experiment (Figure 7, A), it was
desired to temporarily block class I, show a significant
difference in tumor size, then withdraw the antibody to
demonstrate dissipation of this difference.

Enhancement of the Efferent Limb of the Antitumor
Immune Response by a Single Subtherapeutic Dose of
rmIFNγ
The efferent limb of the antitumor immune response is
invoked when antigen-specific, differentiated CTLs reen-
counter tumor cells expressing the original tumor-associated
antigens. The CTLs then bind to the tumor cell via interac-
tion between MHC class I and the CD8+ T-cell receptor,
resulting in activation of the CTL, cytokine release, and
initiation of the apoptotic cascade in the bound tumor
cell.1-3 Given the vital role of MHC class I in CTL binding
and activation in the efferent limb, we sought to determine
whether prior exposure of target tumor cells to rmIFNγ
would make these processes more efficient based on the
ability of this cytokine to up-regulate MHC class I expres-
sion. The present study suggests that this is true and is
supported by the following observations. First, although
CTLs from AdCD40L-treated mice bind target B16.F10
cells in vitro, this binding is significantly more pronounced
if the tumor cells are pretreated with rmIFNγ. Second, this

362 The Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery • February 2004
```