```plaintext
Merritt et al                                                                                     General Thoracic Surgery

Augmenting major histocompatibility complex class I 
expression by murine tumors in vivo enhances antitumor 
immunity induced by an active immunotherapy strategy

Robert E. Merritt, MD
Reiko E. Yamada, BA
Ronald G. Crystal, MD
Robert J. Korst, MD

Objective: Tumors down-regulate major histocompatibility complex class I expres-
sion, escaping recognition by the cellular immune response. We hypothesized that
augmentation of tumor cell class I expression by interferon-gamma would enhance
the cellular antitumor immune response and cure rate of an active immunotherapy
strategy.

Methods: B16.F10 tumor cells were exposed to interferon-gamma in culture, and
class I expression was quantified using flow cytometry. Syngeneic mice bearing
established tumors were injected with interferon-gamma (5000 U, intraperitoneal),
and class I expression was assessed using immunohistochemistry. Tumor-specific
cytotoxic T lymphocytes were induced in mice by an intratumoral injection of
AdCD40L (5 x 10^10 particles), an adenovirus gene transfer vector-based immuno-
therapy strategy previously demonstrated to augment cellular antitumor immunity.
A conjugate-formation assay and the enzyme-linked immunospot assay were used to
evaluate the binding and activation of cytotoxic T lymphocytes, respectively.
Interferon-gamma was administered to tumor-bearing mice concomitantly with
intratumoral AdCD40L. End points measured included the frequencies of cytotoxic
T lymphocytes using the enzyme-linked immunospot assay, tumor size, and mouse
survival. The role of class I expression was further evaluated by monoclonal
antibody blockade in both in vitro and in vivo experiments.

Results: B16.F10 cells exposed to interferon-gamma expressed significantly more
class I, both in vitro and in vivo, and were able to bind to and activate cytotoxic T
lymphocytes more efficiently than untreated cells. Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte frequen-
cies, tumor regression, and the cure rate induced by AdCD40L were augmented by
the addition of a single dose of interferon-gamma in tumor-bearing mice. These in
vitro and in vivo effects of interferon-gamma were attenuated by class I monoclonal
antibody blockade.

Conclusions: Up-regulation of class I expression using interferon-gamma enhances
the cellular antitumor immune response and cure rate of AdCD40L, an active
immunotherapy strategy. This approach may be useful for human tumors that lack
class I expression.

From the Department of Cardiothoracic
Surgery, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, NY.

These studies were supported, in part, by
the Will Rogers Memorial Fund, Los An-
geles, Calif; Gen Vec, Inc., Gaithersburg,
Md; and grants from The Thoracic Surgery
Foundation for Research and Education
(R.J.K.) and the American Lung Associa-
tion (R.J.K.).

Read at the Eighty-third Annual Meeting of
The American Association for Thoracic
Surgery, Boston, Mass, May 4-7, 2003.

Received for publication May 1, 2003; re-
visions requested July 16, 2003; accepted
for publication Sept 17, 2003.

Address for reprints: Robert J. Korst, MD,
Assistant Professor of Cardiothoracic Sur-
gery, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, Department of Cardiothoracic
Surgery, M404, 525 East 68th Street, Box
110, New York, NY 10021 (E-mail:
rjk2002@med.cornell.edu).

J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2004;127:355-64
0022-5223/$30.00

Copyright © 2004 by The American Associa-
tion for Thoracic Surgery
doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2003.09.007

The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) represents a collection
of genes encoding proteins that are integral in distinguishing be-
tween self and nonself by the immune system.1-3 Class I MHC
molecules are glycoproteins expressed ubiquitously by most nucle-
ated cells and have been shown to be necessary for the presentation
of antigens manufactured by these cells to naive CD8+ T lympho-
cytes.1-3 As such, class I molecules are thought to play a vital role in cell-mediated
immunity against virally infected cells as well as tumors.3 One mechanism by which

The Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery • Volume 127, Number 2  355
```