```plaintext
General Thoracic Surgery                                                                                       Merritt et al

tumor cells are thought to escape the antitumor immune 
response by its attenuating their expression of MHC class I 
molecules. For example, class I is only inconsistently ex- 
pressed by human lung cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.4-8 

Many agents, including some cytokines and chemother- 
apeutics, have been shown to enhance MHC class I expres- 
sion by tumor cells.8-10 One of the most well-characterized 
modulators in this regard is interferon-gamma (IFNγ), 
which has been shown to enhance class I expression in 
multiple human lung cancer cell lines.8,10 Despite this, a 
paucity of data exists concerning the modulation of class I 
molecule expression by IFN in established tumors in vivo. 
In our laboratory, we have developed active antitumor im- 
munotherapy strategies that are dependent on the generation 
of tumor-specific, cellular immunity.11,12 One of these strat- 
egies has involved the transduction of established murine 
tumors with an adenovirus (Ad) gene transfer vector con- 
taining the gene for CD40 ligand (AdCD40L).11 However, 
these strategies have been clearly less effective in murine 
tumors that express low levels of MHC class I.11,12 Given 
that IFNγ enhances the expression of class I by tumor cells 
in vitro,8-10 we hypothesized that administration of IFNγ to 
mice bearing established tumors would up-regulate MHC 
class I expression by the tumors and, subsequently, enhance 
tumor-specific cellular immunity induced by AdCD40L. In 
this regard, the data show that (1) exposure of B16.F10 
tumor cells to IFNγ augments MHC class I expression in 
vitro and in vivo and enhances tumor cell binding to tumor- 
specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs); (2) treatment of 
tumor-bearing mice with a single dose of IFNγ results in 
more efficient generation of tumor-specific CTLs by an 
active immunotherapy strategy (AdCD40L); (3) exposure of 
B16.F10 tumor cells to IFNγ enhances tumor-specific CTL 
activation in coculture; (4) a single dose of IFNγ adminis- 
tered to tumor-bearing mice augments the antitumor activity 
and cure rate of an established immunotherapy strategy 
(AdCD40L); and (5) these synergistic effects of IFNγ are 
attenuated by the administration of an anti-MHC class I 
monoclonal antibody (MAb).

Materials and Methods 
Mice 
Female wild-type C57BL/6 (H-2b) mice (6-8 weeks old) were 
obtained from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, Me). The mice 
were housed under specific pathogen-free conditions and treated 
according to the National Institutes of Health guidelines. All 
animal procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care 
and Use Committee.

Cell Culture 
B16.F10 (H-2b) and Lewis Lung Carcinoma (LLC; H-2b) are 
syngeneic to C57BL/6 mice. The cell lines were obtained from 
American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, Va; catalog 
no. CRL 6475) and maintained in complete Dulbecco’s modified 

Eagle’s medium (DMEM; 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 μg/mL 
streptomycin, and 100 U/mL penicillin) at 5% CO2 and 37°C.

Adenovirus Vectors 
All gene transfer vectors used in this study are replication-defi- 
cient, E1-, E3-vectors based on the adenovirus serotype 5 (Ad5) 
genome. AdCD40L contains an expression cassette with the mu- 
rine CD40L cDNA under the control of the cytomegalovirus 
early-immediate promoter/enhancer.11 AdNull, a control vector, is 
similar to AdCD40L but contains an empty expression cassette.13 
Adenovirus vectors were propagated in human embryonic kidney 
cells (293 cells; ATCC) and purified through 2 cesium chloride 
gradient ultracentrifugations as previously described.14,15 The vi- 
ral particle concentration was determined by ultraviolet absor- 
bance at 260 nm.16

Quantification of MHC Class I Expression in Vitro 
To determine whether IFNγ up-regulates the expression of class I 
by B16.F10 cells in vitro, 50% confluent B16.F10 cells were 
exposed to 500 U/mL of recombinant murine IFNγ (rmIFNγ; 
Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) for 48 hours in com- 
plete DMEM at 37°C. The cells were harvested, washed 3 times 
with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and stained with either 
fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated mouse anti-mouse 
H-2Kb MAb or FITC-mouse immunoglobulin G (IgG)2κ isotype 
control antibody (Pharmingen, San Diego, Calif). The cells were 
then subjected to flow cytometric analysis (FACStar, Becton Dick- 
inson, San Jose, Calif) to determine H-2Kb MHC class I expres- 
sion.

Modulation of MHC Class I Expression in Vivo 
To assess the ability of IFNγ to enhance MHC class I expression 
by established tumors in vivo, 5 × 105 B16.F10 cells were 
injected subcutaneously in the right flanks of wild-type 
C57BL/6 mice. When the tumors were approximately 45 to 50 
mm2 (day 8), a single subtherapeutic dose (5000 U) of rmIFNγ 
was administered into the peritoneal cavity (IP). The animals 
were killed and the tumors harvested 24 or 48 hours after 
rmIFNγ injection. Untreated tumor-bearing mice served as neg- 
ative controls. The tumors were resected from the right flank, 
embedded in Optimal Cutting Temperature compound (Sakura 
Finetek, Torrance, Calif), snap-frozen in a 2-methylbutane/dry 
ice bath, and prepared as 10-μm frozen sections. The tumor 
sections were blocked with 5% goat serum (Sigma Chemical 
Co, St Louis, Mo) for 20 minutes, washed with PBS, and 
incubated with a biotin-conjugated mouse anti-mouse H-2Kb 
MAb (Pharmingen) for 2 hours. The slides were then washed 
with PBS and incubated with avidin-horseradish peroxidase 
solution (Pharmingen) for 30 minutes. After further washing 
with PBS, the tumor sections were exposed to 3,3’-diaminoben- 
zidine chromagen substrate (Pharmingen) for 10 minutes, 
washed with PBS, and counterstained with hematoxylin. Fol- 
lowing 3 washes with deionized water, the tumor sections were 
rehydrated with 95% ethanol and mounted for light microscopy.

Generation and Purification of Tumor-Specific 
Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes 
To generate activated tumor-specific CD8+ CTLs, 5 × 105 
B16.F10 cells were injected into the right flanks of C57BL/6 mice.

356 The Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery • February 2004
```