```plaintext
be adsorbed by aluminum-containing adjuvants in the vac-
cine [2].

Vaccines experience two different environments during
their manufacture and use: the formulation prior to adminis-
tration and interstitial fluid following intramuscular or sub-
cutaneous administration [3]. Chen et al. [4] performed a
study to determine how adsorption in the formulation af-
fects antibody production in rabbits. The surface charge of
aluminum-containing adjuvant was modified to produce vac-
cines in which 3, 35 or 85% of the 4.8 mg dose of lysozyme
was adsorbed. The three vaccines induced much higher an-
tibody titers than a 4.8 mg lysozyme solution but all three
vaccines induced the same antibody titer. When the three vac-
cines were mixed with sheep lymph fluid to simulate intersti-
tial fluid, the degree of lysozyme adsorption in each vaccine
changed to 40% within 1 h. Because all of the vaccines had
the same degree of lysozyme adsorption in interstitial fluid
and induced the same degree of immunopotentiation, it was
concluded that immunopotentiation by aluminum-containing
adjuvants correlates with the degree of antigen adsorption in
interstitial fluid following administration rather than the de-
gree of antigen adsorption in the vaccine.

A recent study [5] investigated whether it was neces-
sary for the antigen to elute or remain adsorbed to alu-
minum hydroxide adjuvant (AH) in order to produce im-
munopotentiation. Antigen was adsorbed to AH or to a
dextran phosphate anion exchange complexed with aluminum
(DPAC), which completely adsorbed to AH by electro-
static attraction [6]. After exposure to interstitial fluid for 1 h,
100% of the AC remained adsorbed to AH while only 10%
of the DPAC remained adsorbed. All of the AC remained
adsorbed to AH even after 24 h of exposure to interstitial
fluid. In comparison, the DPAC was completely eluted af-
ter 6 h of exposure to interstitial fluid. It was concluded that
the strong ligand exchange adsorption mechanism, whereby
a phosphate in AC displaced a surface hydroxyl to form an
inner sphere complex with AH [7], maintained complete ad-
sorption of AC in interstitial fluid [8]. However, since DPAC
adsorbed to AH by forming an outer sphere complex by elec-
trostatic attraction [7], it completely eluted from AH during
exposure to interstitial fluid. It was found that AH potentiated
the immune response in mice for both AC and DPAC. The
results indicated that aluminum-containing adjuvants poten-
tiate the immune response when the antigen elutes from the
adjuvant following administration as well as when the antigen
remains adsorbed following administration.

An important step in the induction of the immune response
is the internalization of the antigen by antigen presenting
cells, such as dendritic cells (DCs). Macropinocytosis and
phagocytosis are two mechanisms of antigen internalization
by DCs [9–14]. Antigens that elute from the adjuvant surface
are internalized by DCs by macropinocytosis while those that
remain adsorbed are internalized by phagocytosis.

While the study with AC and DPAC [5] demonstrated that
antigen internalization by antigen presenting cells occurs by
both macropinocytosis and phagocytosis, the relative effi-
ciency of each route was not studied. Thus, this study was un-
dertaken to compare antigen internalization by macropinocy-
tosis and phagocytosis. AC labeled with a green fluorescent
dye was chosen as the model antigen. AC contains eight phos-
phate groups, is adsorbed to AH by ligand exchange and
does not elute from AH when exposed to interstitial fluid [5].
Dendritic cells were incubated with a solution of fluorescent-
labeled AC to model antigens that elute from the adjuvant
surface following administration. Dendritic cells were also
incubated with fluorescent labeled AC adsorbed to AH to
model antigens that do not elute following administration.
In addition, the effect of the aggregate size of the adjuvant
on the internalization of AC by phagocytosis was studied.
The efficiency of antigen internalization was monitored by
confocal microscopy and flow cytometry.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Adjuvants

Aluminum hydroxide adjuvant (Rehydragel HPA, Reheis,
Berkeley Heights, NJ) and aluminum phosphate adjuvant
(AP) (Aduj-Phos, Brenntag Biosector, Elsenbakken, Den-
mark) were used in this study. The AP was prepared by
precipitation with phosphate and AH at molar ratios of 1:1,
2:1 or 2:1. For 1:1 phosphate-treated AH (PTAH-1), 769 μl
of commercial AH containing 13 mg Al/ml was diluted to
10 ml with 3.7 ml of 0.1 M Na3PO4 adjusted to pH 7.4 and
5.53 ml of doubly distilled water adjusted to pH 7.4 and
mixed with a magnetic stirrer for 1 h. The 2:1 phosphate-
treated AH (PTAH-2) was prepared similarly except 7.4 ml
of 1 M Na3 PO4 was used. PTAH-1 and PTAH-2 contained
1 mg Al/ml.

The zeta potential of each adjuvant was determined by
Doppler electrophoretic light scattering analysis (DELSA
440, Coulter, Hialeah, FL). Each adjuvant was diluted 1:80
with the supernatant of the adjuvant obtained by centrifuga-
tion.

2.2. Adsorption isotherms

Each adjuvant prepared in Section 2.1 was diluted to
0.1 mg Al/ml with 10 μM veronal buffer (Sigma, St. Louis,
MO) and adjusted to pH 7.4 with 0.1 M HCl. AC solutions
ranging from 100-300 μg/ml were prepared and adjusted to
pH 7.4 with 0.1 M NaOH or 0.1 M HCl. The adsorption
isotherms were prepared by combining 100 μl of the diluted
adjuvant and 100 μl of the appropriate AC solution and mix-
ing using a vortex mixer at room temperature for 1 h. A pre-
liminary experiment indicated that equilibrium was reached
in less than 30 min. The mixtures were then centrifuged and
the AC concentration of the clear supernatant determined by
the BCA assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL). The adsorptive capac-
```