```plaintext
G.L. Morefield et al. / Vaccine 23 (2005) 1588–1595

1593

(A)                     (B)

(C)                     (D)

Fig. 2. Dendritic cells treated with BODIPY FL (green) labeled alpha casein adsorbed to aluminum hydroxide adjuvant. The cytoskeleton was stained red. The
images are from a z-series of 46 slices. Key: (A) slice 3; (B) slice 15; (C) slice 27; (D) slice 40. The bars represent 10 μm.

diameter of the DCs was approximately 10 μm and the mean
diameter of the BODIPY FL labeled AC/AH aggregates was
17 μm (Table 1). Fig. 2B and C indicate that even though the
diameter of the AH aggregates was larger than the DCs, the
DCs were able to internalize portions of the AH aggregates.
A recent study [22] showed that the primary particles in AH
aggregates were loosely associated and deaggregation readily
occurred. Fig. 2D shows a focal plane at the bottom of the
DCs.

The images in Fig. 2 indicate that AC adsorbed to AH was
internalized by DCs through phagocytosis. However, the DCs
did not internalize entire AH aggregates. Rather, the DCs
engulfed and internalized fragments of the AH aggregates.

3.5. Flow cytometry

The DCs were also analyzed by flow cytometry to quan-
tify the internalization efficiency of AC in solution and AC
adsorbed to AH. When the fluorescence intensities were mea-
sured, it was found that internalization of both AC in solution
and AC adsorbed to AH occurred quickly as most internal-
ization occurred during the first 30 min of exposure (Fig. 3).
The DCs that were incubated with AC adsorbed to AH had
a fluorescence intensity four times greater than DCs treated
with the same amount of AC as a solution. This indicates
that antigen internalization through phagocytosis of adsorbed
antigen was more efficient than macropinocytosis of antigen
in solution.

3.6. Effect of adjuvant aggregate diameter

The observation that enhanced internalization of adsorbed
antigen occurred even though the adjuvant aggregates were
larger than the DCs led to an experiment to study the effect
of adjuvant aggregate size on the internalization of adsorbed

BODIPY FL Fluorescence Intensity

175
150
125
100
75
50
25
0

0          1          2          3

Time (hr)

Fig. 3. BODIPY FL fluorescence intensity of dendritic cells treated with
BODIPY FL labeled alpha casein in solution (■); BODIPY FL labeled
alpha casein adsorbed to aluminum hydroxide adjuvant (♦); BODIPY FL
labeled alpha casein adsorbed to phosphate-treated aluminum hydroxide
adjuvant-1 (×); BODIPY FL labeled alpha casein adsorbed to phosphate-
treated aluminum hydroxide adjuvant-2 (◊); BODIPY FL labeled alpha
casein adsorbed to aluminum phosphate adjuvant (▲).
```