Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Vaccine 23 (2005) 1588–1595

www.elsevier.com/locate/vaccine

Role of aluminum-containing adjuvants in antigen internalization by dendritic cells in vitro

Garry L. Morefield^a, Anna Sokolovska^b, Dongping Jiang^a, Harm HogenEsch^b, J. Paul Robinson^c, Stanley L. Hem^a,*

a Department of Industrial and Physical Pharmacy, Purdue University, 575 Stadium Mall Drive, Room 124, West Lafayette, IN 47907-2051, USA
b Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
c Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA

Received 15 April 2004; accepted 21 July 2004
Available online 31 October 2004

Abstract

An important step in the induction of an immune response to vaccines is the internalization of antigens by antigen presenting cells, such as dendritic cells (DCs). Many current vaccines are formulated with antigens adsorbed to an aluminum-containing adjuvant. Following injection of the vaccine the antigens may either elute or stay adsorbed to the adjuvant surface. Antigens, which elute from the adjuvant surface, are internalized by dendritic cells through macropinocytosis while those that remain adsorbed are internalized with the adjuvant particle by phagocytosis. The relative efficiency of these two routes of internalization was studied. Alpha casein (AC) labeled with a green fluorescent dye was selected as the model antigen. In order to model vaccine antigens that elute from aluminum-containing adjuvants following administration, dendritic cells were incubated with a solution of fluorochrome-labeled alpha casein. To model vaccine antigens that do not elute from aluminum-containing adjuvants following administration, dendritic cells were exposed to fluorochrome-labeled alpha casein adsorbed to aluminum hydroxide adjuvant (AH). Alpha casein has eight phosphate groups and adsorbs to aluminum hydroxide adjuvant through ligand exchange. Alpha casein does not elute from aluminum hydroxide adjuvant upon exposure to cell culture media. The uptake of antigen by dendritic cells was determined at 0.5, 1, 2 and 3 h by confocal microscopy and flow cytometry. Dendritic cells internalized both alpha casein in solution and alpha casein adsorbed to aluminum hydroxide adjuvant. However, the mean fluorescence intensity of dendritic cells incubated with adsorbed alpha casein was four times greater than dendritic cells incubated with alpha casein in solution. In addition, the internalization of alpha casein was enhanced when the mean aggregate diameter of the adjuvant in the cell culture media was reduced from 17 μm to 3 μm. It was concluded that antigen internalization by dendritic cells was enhanced when the antigen remained adsorbed to the aluminum-containing adjuvant following administration and the aggregate size of the adjuvant was smaller than dendritic cells which are approximately 10 μm in diameter.

© 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Aluminum-containing adjuvants; Phagocytosis; Dendritic cells; Antigen internalization; Macropinocytosis

1. Introduction

The ability of aluminum-containing adjuvants to increase the immunogenicity of antigens was discovered in 1926 when Glenny et al. [1] found that injection of guinea pigs with diphtheria toxoid precipitated with potassium alum provided greater protection from the toxin than injection of toxoid alone. They also observed that when the precipitate was filtered, the filtrate contained none of the toxoid. This led to the belief that adsorption of the antigen to aluminum-containing adjuvants prior to administration is essential for enhancement of immunogenicity. Regulatory agencies require evidence that the antigen is adsorbed by aluminum-containing adjuvants. For example, the World Health Organization recommends that at least 80% of diphtheria and tetanus toxoids

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 765 494 1451; fax: +1 765 494 6545.
E-mail address: hem@pharmacy.purdue.edu (S.L. Hem).

0264-410X/$ – see front matter © 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2004.07.050