```plaintext
444

perturbed monocyte development in early life and an absence of some 
macrophage subsets.56,200–202 Although total DC numbers are down in 
these mice,203 it is in accordance with total spleen size and so probably 
does not reflect a specific defect in the DC compartment (Winter- 
Pack et al.204, V Demeec, personal communication). Of the DCs that 
are present, the splenic subtypes are also in their expected ratio and 
density and exhibit normal functions (in the assays tested), suggesting 
M-CSF is not obligatory for steady-state DC precursors, nor are the 
precursors monocytes. However, M-CSF might play a role in the 
maintenance of the pool of DC18 and in augmenting DC develop- 
ment.205 M-CSF has also recently been described as a novel DC 
poietin. In that study, the nonadherent cells ordinarily discarded in 
M-CSF cultures (which are employed to generate macrophages) 
contained DCs.206 

Third, the major cytokine driving the generation of the steady-state 
cDC subtypes in vivo appears to be Flt3 ligand (FL) as evidenced by an 
absence of DCs in genetic knockouts of FL, or members of its signalling 
pathway, such as STAT3.207,208 By contrast, these mice have normal 
monocyte development209 and GM-CSF-derived DC development.207 

Moreover, it is important to note that in vitro CD8+ DCs and GM- 
CSF-derived DCs are fundamentally different in terms of their 
derivation from precursors,59,210 in their function,191 and in their 
genetic makeup.211 Thus, despite popular assumption, they may 
represent distinct DC types. 

Inflammatory TNF-a iNOS-producing DC 
When would GM-CSF become important for monocyte-derived DC 
development? In the absence of FL, GM-CSF is required for the 
generation of DCs in the spleen, but not in the lung.212 In the spleen, 
lung preparations of mice treated with LPS, generated TNF-a and 
iNOS-producing DCs (Tip DCs) that were not present in the spleen 
of FL-deficient mice, but were in the FL in vivo equivalent of GM- 
CSF-driven monocyte-derived DCs came when a novel DC subtype 
was identified in the spleen of mice 1–2 days after infection with 
Listeria monocytogenes.213 This TNF-a (tumor necrosis factor-a) and 
iNOS (inducible nitric oxide synthase) producing DC (Tip DC) was 
unique in phenotype in that they were CD11cintCD11bhiMAC-3+ 
unlike splenic steady-state cDC, which are CD11c+CD11bintMAC- 
3- in mice deficient for the chemokine receptor CCR2, this DC subset 
failed to develop in spleen, but CD11c+ cDC numbers were normal. 
Interestingly, the Ly6Chi monocyte subset selectively expresses CCR2,40 
and so was presumed to be the contributing precursor to this kind of 
DC.44 Price in vitro evidence for such a process came in our model of 
inflammation where CD11c+MHCII+Ly6Chi monocytes developed 
into CD11cintMHCII+MAC-3+ DCs.59 Since the description of Tip 
DCs, and even before, other CD11cintCD11bhi DCs have been 
described that arise during many bacterial, viral and parasitic infec- 
tions, and autoimmune sequelae (summarized in Table 2). Whether 
these are involved in immunity, infection control or regulation will be 
very important to dissect in the future. 

GM-CSF-derived DCs and the in vitro equivalents of Tip DCs 
In light of the above evidence, Xu and colleagues explored whether 
GM-CSF-derived DC cultures represent Tip DCs rather than those of 
the steady state.191 By all parameters tested, this appeared to be the 
case. Specifically, GM-CSF-derived DCs, but not FL-derived DCs (see 
below), were large and granular, had the phenotype 
CD11c+MHCII+Mac-3+, could produce TNF-a and iNOS in response 
to TLR agonists, and could develop from Ly6Chi monocytes—all 
parameters which aligned with their Tip DCs, and not those of the 
steady state or from FL cultures. Interestingly only activated GM-CSF- 

derived DCs and Tip DCs produced chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2), 
perhaps pointing to roles in further monocyte recruitment (CCL2 
binds CCR2 on Ly6Chi monocytes), and produced IL-10, perhaps 
indicating an immunosuppressive role. Related to this, Ly6Chi mono- 
cytes have been implicated as the myeloid suppressor cells in a mouse 
model of multiple sclerosis.214 

FL-DERIVED DCs REPRESENT STEADY-STATE CD8+, CD8- 
AND pDCs 
If GM-CSF cultures do not best represent the steady-state DC path- 
way, then can any other culture methods substitute? Immune 
scientists provided the answer in a key publication,215 with a more 
thorough examination of the question from our laboratory.174 In view 
of the observations that FL treatment increased DC numbers,216,217 
and that FL-/- mice had abrogated DC numbers,208 the immune 
group devised a novel culture system to generate DCs.215 BM cell 
cultures supplemented with FL for 9 days generated DCs in roughly 
the same number as total BM cells initially seeded. Interestingly, in an 
often-overlooked paper, these DCs were morphologically and 
phenotypically distinct from GM-CSF-derived DCs,218 with further 
characterization of these differences by Xu and colleagues191 (see 
above). 

Despite the lack of CD8 or CD4 expression, the investiga- 
tors215,219,220 classified three DC subtypes in these cultures: 
CD11c+B220+ pDCs, CD11bhiCD11clo DCs and CD11c+CD11bhi 
DCs. Considering CD11c+CD11bhiDCs (which would have also 
contained pDCs) upregulated surface CD86 after LPS activation and 
secreted IL-12 upon TLR9 engagement, these DCs were considered 
CD24hiSirp-a+ and CD24-Sirp-a+ DCs, and demonstrated they were 
indeed bona fide equivalents of CD8+ and CD8- cDCs—not only 
phenotypically, but also functionally (Figure 1). For example, only the 
CD8+ FL-DC equivalents expressed CD8a and TLR3, produced 
IL-12 p70 in response to TLR agonists, could cross-present cell- 
associated antigen to CD8+ T cells, and were dependent on the 
latent regulatory factor (IRF-8) transcription factor for its devel- 
opment, among other unique features.174 Worth noting here for those 
wishing to use this system is that CD8+ FL-DC equivalents could not 
process nor present soluble antigen, unlike their in vivo counterparts (Sri 
Naik and NS Wilson, personal observation). 
If the research purpose is to investigate the development or function 
of the steady-state pDC, CD8+ or CD8- cDCs, then FL cultures are 
currently the simplest and most representative in vitro protocol. Most 
importantly, one can get up to 20 times more total DCs from BM FL 
cultures per mouse compared to spleen, and up to 80 times more 
CD8+ DC equivalents. Access to a mouse FL-expressing Chinese 
Hamster Ovary cell line is available upon request. 

THE STEPS IN DC DEVELOPMENT 
Determined so far... 
So what are the steps in DC development? Our first line of experi- 
ments to recapitulate the observations of others57,221 that Ly6Chi mono- 
cytes and CD8- cDC could be precursors of CD8+ cDC did not yield 
the same results.59,222 This fitted with previous and subsequent 
data40,44,46,56 which destroyed the age-old assumption that monocytes 
were precursors of all DCs. Instead, we and another group identified 
spleen-resident precursors that were monocytes but that could 
generate DCs upon transfer with relatively high efficiency into non- 
irradiated recipients.39,59 These were termed pre-cDC. Although repre- 
senting a minor population within spleen (0.05%), they accounted for 

Immunology and Cell Biology
```