```plaintext
genic functions attributed to this subtype in rodents.8 Also, due to a 
chasm between murine and human DC research that is only now 
being bridged, there has never been a good answer. Here, an 
inadequately brief summary of human DC subtype findings and 
recent developments is presented. 
As mentioned earlier, CD8+ DCs are barely detectable in the blood 
of a steady-state mouse and are instead found in the T-cell areas of 
lymphoid organs. As researchers of human DCs have generally focused 
on blood DCs or blood precursor derived (with GM-CSF) DCs, it is 
perhaps no surprise that they have not yet been ‘discovered’ in our 
species. Moreover, as described earlier, GM-CSF-derived DCs are not 
the best model for dissection of the CD8+ DC equivalent. 
Some early potential clues for a human CD8+ DC equivalent can be 
found when combining the description of (1) DC heterogeneity in 
human spleen,243 (2) an interdigitating DC (not an LC) in the 
T-cell areas of tonsillar tissue that was CD1c+ MHCII+ DRC-1– 
(R4/23–) and CD1a– (Langerin–)244 and (3) an IL-12 p70-producing 
CD11b+CD45RO thymic DC subtype.245 Hart and colleagues also 
thoroughly investigated human DCs and identified several 
subtypes,246 including a CD13hiCD45ROhi population that shares 
some characteristics with mouse CD8+ DCs247 and BDCA3+ DCs 
(see below). 
More recently, the new BDCA (blood DC antigen) markers (1–4) 
from Miltenyi248 have facilitated a clearer dissection of human DCs, 
and identified a rare BDCA3-expressing cell in blood that was not a 
pDC, LC or myeloid DC128,246–248 at that stage, no further subdissec- 
tion as to its function was explored. Two more recent publications, 
one from the group of Haniffa et al.249 and the other from 
Schreibelt et al.,250 have identified a BDCA3+ DC subset in human 
blood and skin, respectively. The latter study demonstrated that 
BDCA3+ DCs were superior at cross-presentation of soluble antigen 
compared with other DC subsets. In a similar vein, Poulin et al.251 
at the University of Nantes, in collaboration with the group of 
Haniffa et al.,249 have recently published a comprehensive study of 
human DC subsets, identifying a BDCA3+ DC subset in blood, 
dermis and lung that was distinct from pDCs and CD1c+ DCs. 
Furthermore, they demonstrated that BDCA3+ DCs were superior 
at cross-presentation of soluble antigen compared with other DC 
subsets. 
In a similar study, scientists at Amgen further characterized the 
BDCA3+ DC subtype that expanded in patients injected with FL, a 
treatment known to expand DCs in humans and especially CD8+ DCs 
in mice.21,249 Using phage display and the ‘immune synix’ 
(acknowledgements in Collin et al.242), they identified a rare reactive 
peptide that recognized the antigen nectin-like protein 2 (or Necl2) 
not only on BDCA3+ human DCs, but more importantly also on 
CD8+ mouse spleen DCs. Like murine CD8+ DCs,250 they were also 
CD11c+MHCII+CD2+CD31+CD36–Robbins et al. (CD141hiCD11b–HLA- 
DRlo) and in the T-cell areas of spleen. 
Another landmark study from Robbins et al.211 went further and 
compared gene expression profiles with and between mouse and 
human DC subtypes using microarrays, and found some striking 
patterns and close matches. Although unexpected, they nicely 
demonstrated correlations between mouse versus human pDCs, and 
mouse versus human GM-CSF-derived DCs.211 They also demon- 
strated a hierarchical relationship within the species’ DC subtypes; for 
example, murine CD8+ and CD8– DC subtypes were most related, 
followed by their relationship to pDC. The relationship of these DC 
subtypes, however, was relatively distant from the interrelated myeloid 
lineages including monocytes, monocyte-derived DCs (with GM- 
CSF), macrophages and granulocytes. This fits nicely with our findings 
of late-branching between the DC subtypes, their proximity within the 
pDC pathway, but their distinction from the myeloid pathway (see 
above and references7,9,59,174,210). Another exciting observation was 
that BDCA3+ human DCs and CD8+ mouse DCs showed a ‘partial 
functional equivalence’. Many genes that were common had not yet 
been ascribed a function. The exceptions were TLR3, also identified as 
unique within BDCA3+ DC and CD8+ cDC-specific in prior stu- 
dies,23251 and Necl2, as described above. Undoubtedly, any future 
study that potentially correlates the unique functional attributes of 

CD8+ DCs in the mouse to the BDCA3+ DCs in human will be a 
seminal publication. 

WHERE TO NOW? 
Like always, there are many unanswered questions, and novel tech- 
nologies may help to address some of these. Currently, lineage 
determination in vivo involves the transfer of a cell population. 
Although single cell in vivo assays are possible but difficult, they, or 
a cell-tracing technology to mimic this, are ultimately required to 
create meaningful maps of developmental pathways. Also of impor- 
tance will be the ability to selectively deplete individual subtypes in 
vivo. Whether through a diphtheria toxin-based system,252 or other 
methods, such tools could dissect the importance of the subtypes in 
various immune reactions, including the generation of Th1, Th2, 
Th17 and Treg generation, in the clearance of various pathogens and 
cancer, in their contribution to autoimmune pathology and other 
physiological homeostases. In terms of understanding DC develop- 
ment from precursors, the pathways still under debate will, of course, 
need to be clarified. However, we must eventually move away from 
protocols that involve extracting, sorting and injecting precursors 
intravenously, and explore other models where the real contributions 
of progenitors in an unperturbed in vivo situation are at work. 
Although the picture emerging for the precise pathways in steady- 
state hematopoiesis are becoming clearer, the changes in emergency 
hematopoiesis and DC development that occur upon infection/ 
inflammation is still in its infancy253–255 but will be important to 
understand. The role of microenvironments and in vivo niches that dictate 
differentiation and function of DCs, and the molecules that instruct 
these processes, are also largely unknown. Whether these are 
cytokines, secreted hormones or the like, our accrued understanding 
of the field of immunology hopefully will also lead to novel 
therapeutic options, which are already well under way. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I am indebted to the Shortman, Wu and Villadangos labs of the Walter and 
Eliza Hall Institute (WEHI) for my DC training. Also many thanks to Meredith 
O’Keeffe, Hubertus Hochrein and Dalia Rottschafer for useful discussions and 
critique in preparation of this paper. This does not imply that these colleagues 
necessarily concur with all statements in this review. Support by Marie Curie 
Fellowship funded by the FP6 program of the European Union is also 
acknowledged. 

REFERENCES 
1 Van Epps HL. Discerning lymphocyte subsets. J Exp Med 2005; 201: 5. 
2 Miller JF, Mitchell GF. Cell to cell interaction in the immune response. I. Hemolysin- 
forming cells in neonatally thymectomized mice reconstituted with thymus or thoracic 
duct lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1968; 128: 801–820. 
3 Mitchell GF, Miller JF. Cell to cell interaction in the immune response. II. The source of 
hemolysin-forming cells in irradiated mice given bone marrow and thymus or thoracic 
duct lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1968; 128: 821–837. 
4 Crowley M, Inaba K, Witmer-Pack M, Steinman RM. The cell surface of mouse 
dendritic cells: FACS analysis of dendritic cells from different tissues including 
thymus. Cell Immunol 1989; 118: 108–125. 
5 Vremec D, Pooley J, Hochrein H, Wu L, Shortman K. CD4 and CD8 expression 
by dendritic cell subtypes in mouse thymus and spleen. J Immunol 2000; 164: 
2978–2986. 
6 Vremec D, Zorbas M, Scollay R, Saunders DJ, Ardavin C, Wu L et al. The surface 
phenotype of dendritic cells purified from mouse thymus and spleen: investigation 
of the CD8 expression by a subpopulation of dendritic cells. J Exp Med 1992; 176: 
47–58. 
7 Shortman K, Naik SH. Steady-state and inflammatory dendritic-cell development. Nat 
Rev Immunol 2007; 7: 19–30. 
8 Villadangos JA, Schnorrer P. Intrinsic and cooperative antigen-presenting functions of 
dendritic-cell subsets in vivo. Nat Rev Immunol 2007; 7: 543–555. 

Immunology and Cell Biology
```