```plaintext
most of the spleen’s DC precursor activity in a 5-day in vivo transfer 
assay, could generate both DC subtypes without much further division 
and could even be further separated using CD24 into CD8+ cDC-only 
precursors or CD8− cDC-only precursors (Figure 1). The equivalents 
of CD11c+MHCII− pre-DCs were also found in BM and other 
lymphoid organs,39,89 and at earlier times in FL cultures.210 
Thus, DCs can arise from a precursor that is resident within the 
lymphoid organ itself, and this cell is not a monocyte. 
What about earlier precursors to the pre-DCs? As expected, DCs 
can be derived from haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), but they are 
unique in their derivation from both CMPs and CLP progenitors, as 
long as they express surface fms.123,227–229 Further downstream, Fogg 
et al.45 have identified a precursor within the CMP fraction that could 
produce cDCs (both CD8+ and CD8−) and macrophages, but not 
granulocytes, pDCs or any other lineage (Figure 1). In contrast, our 
group210 and that of Manz230 have identified a precursor in BM as well 
as in FL cultures, termed pro-DCs, which could generate both CD8+ 
and CD8− cDC subtypes as well as pDCs, but not macrophages or any 
other lineage (Figures 1 and 3). Pro-DCs generate pre-DCs en route to 
the generation of the DC subtypes. 
Whether MDP and pro-DCs represent distinct or overlapping 
populations is not clear (Figure 3). What might account for the 
differences? Phenotypically, MDPs and pro-DCs are very similar in 
phenotype (both are Lin−Sca-1−IL7Rα−CD11bint). However, at least in 
our hands, most but not all pro-DCs are CD34+CD16/32−/int, whereas 
MDPs are largely CD34−/16/32+. We also find that not all in vivo 
pro-DCs are M-CSFR+/39. A second important difference is that we 
find that MDPs are more dependent on GM-CSF. Given the GM-CSF 
cytokine, it is possible that MDPs are precursors of monocyte-derived 
DCs, but not monocyte-independent steady-state DCs. Arguing 
against this was that MDPs could generate large numbers of CD8+ 
and CD8− cDCs, but not pDCs, on a per-cell basis in vivo.45 However, 
as the assays in that part of the study were not clonal, so there is a 
possibility that macrophage and DC precursors were distinct popula- 
tions within cells classed as MDPs. Another possibility is that there are 
multiple routes to DC production and both pro-DCs and MDPs make 
a contribution. There is precedence for this considering both CLPs 
and CMPs can give rise to all splenic DC subtypes. Certainly further 
comparison between the two progenitors will be required. 

Blood-derived or organ-resident precursors 
Since DCs are found in the blood of humans, it had been generally 
assumed that they are derived in the BM and circulate as DCs to the 
organs, and there is evidence to support this.35,228,229 However, as 
several groups, including ours have identified or implied organ- 
resident DC precursors,39,56,59,89,139,210 it suggests that the final step 
of differentiation may take place within the organ itself for some DC 
subtypes. We speculated in one study that the existence of pre-cDCs 
could indicate derivation from a long-term organ-resident reservoir of 
DC precursors, and/or that they represented ‘in-transit’ cells from the 
BM en route to DC development.59 Liu et al.230 tackled this question 
elegantly by utilizing mouse pairs that differ in CD45 allotype and are 
physically joined, like Siamese twins, so their bloodstream and there- 
fore leukocyte migration is shared (parabiotic mice). As leukocytes 
are circulating at long lived, they reached a 50:50 host:partner 
chimerism 7 days after anastomoses, as would be expected. However, 
only 17–35% of host DCs were partner derived. The authors con- 
cluded that this implied DC chimerism reflected the short half-life 
of DC precursors in blood—that is, most host-derived blood-borne 
DC precursors have already replaced or extravasated host tissue 
when they can reach the partner. Formally, the parabiotic experiments 
cannot fully exclude longer-term intraplenic DC precursors for the 
reason that each experiment was terminated before the host: 
parabiotic separation, where most DCs were again of host origin 
within 10–14 days. Caution should be exercised when interpreting this 
as a longer half life of DCs, rather than the 3–5 days originally 
described,231,232 if there were remnant donor DC precursors also 
present in partner spleen after separation. Nevertheless, unless the 
process of parabiotic separation somehow alters DC homeostasis, it 
appears that many, if not all, DCs are derived from circulating 
precursors. 
What then are such circulating DC precursors? One or more of 
many stages of the DC development process could account for 
replenishment. DCs themselves may develop in BM and then be 
released into the bloodstream to replenish the splenic DC pool, even 
though such cells are barely detectable in the bloodstream.37 Alter- 
natively, one or more of the pre-DC,39,56,59,89,210 pro-DC,210 MDPs45 
or an as yet unidentified DC precursor may do the job. Pre-DCs are 
clearly a good candidate considering they are found in many organs, 
including BM, blood and spleen, and can give rise to DCs.39,56,59,89,210 
Cells with the phenotype of pro-DCs are also present in spleen (SH 
Naik, unpublished observations), so may also play a role. 
None of the aforementioned studies need be contradictory—just 
their interpretation. Thus DC homeostasis may involve a coordinated 
regulation of limited to major self-renewal56,139,233,234 and derivation 
from blood-derived precursors230 that include one more of the pre- 
DC, pro-DC or MDP populations. 

THE ‘GRADED’ COMMITMENT MODEL 
The large expansion of pro-DCs and the use of the FL culture system 
afforded us the unique opportunity to perform single cell, clonal 
assays for the first time. We asked the simple question of whether a 
single precursor could produce all three of the pDC, CD8+ and CD8− 
cDC subtypes, or whether there are individual subtype-committed 

Figure 3 The confusion regarding dendritic cell (DC) development from 
‘intermediate’ stage precursors. All DCs appear to derive from fms-like 
tyrosine kinase 3 (flt3)-expressing progenitors, whether they are common 
myeloid progenitor (CMP) or common lymphoid progenitor (CLP) derived. 
One group has identified a downstream macrophage-DC precursor (MDP) of 
conventional CD8+ & CD8− conventional DCs (cDCs) and macrophages, but 
not plasmacytoid cells (pDCs) or other lineages. In contrast, two other 
groups have identified pro-DCs (also known as common DC precursors 
(CDPs)) that generate conventional CD8+ and CD8− DCs and pDCs but not 
macrophages or other lineages. Whether these are distinct, overlapping or 
incorrectly described pathways remains to be determined. 

Immunology and Cell Biology
```