```plaintext
440                                                                                           DC subsets and their development
                                                                                                           SH Naik

immune response appear to have developed over evolutionary time.12 
DCs appear to be one of the most important of these processes and 
they must contend with several variables when providing such a link. 
These include (1) the distinct kinds of pathogens, (2) distinct routes of 
infection and (3) the inhibitory mechanisms employed by pathogens 
to limit their detection.

How do DCs sense infections? Pathogens unwittingly, or at least 
unwittingly, signal their presence by their associated molecular 
patterns or resulting pathology,13 for which DCs, in turn, have pattern 
recognition receptors.14 If this is the case, could not the one kind of 
DC conceivably arm itself with all receptors and respond only in 
accordance to each infection? The answer could be ‘yes’, and one might 
find an example if lower-order animals were probed for such a 
putative ancestral DC subtype. But at least in many mammalian 
species, the answer appears to be ‘no’, with the presence of many 
distinct and overlapping DC subtypes.7,15–18 Perhaps ancestral DCs 
split at some evolutionary stage, and the advantages of a division of 
labor of multiple DC subtypes outweighed the simplicity of having 
just the one—akin to the split in T versus B lymphocytes that occurred 
in the transition from jawless to jawed vertebrates.12,19 This is 
speculation and the issue is better suited to the dedicated immune 
evolutionary literature.

DC CLASSIFICATION
As previously described, DCs can be categorized by some general 
properties of their life history.7 Our group has preferred to classify the 
DC family by the following criteria (upon which I have elaborated 
further in Table 1): first, whether they are derived from a common 
myeloid organ (‘migratory’), develop and reside within the lymphoid 
organs (‘resident’) or develop in the bone marrow (BM) and are 
circulating in the bloodstream (‘circulating’); third, whether they are 
present in the uninfected ‘steady state’ or whether they arise with 
infection or inflammation (‘inflammatory’); fourth, into the different 
subtypes and fifth, whether the DC itself is ‘unactivated’ or ‘activated’ 
(the latter could result in T-cell activation or tolerization) (Table 1). 
Each of these classes could, in turn, be given more levels of 
complexity (for example, which organ they are resident in, different 
types of activation and so on), but for the purpose of this review it will 
be left there. Any cell of the DC family, at any one time, should be 
amenable to a value for each of the five classifiers described above.

Pre-DCs versus DCs
Cells in the immediate previous step of DC development are classified 
as pre-DCs. They can differentiate into DCs by default in the steady 
state, or may require additional signals only provided by infection or 
inflammation.7 This is an important distinction to make as some pre-
DCs, such as monocytes and plasmacytoid cells (pDCs), also have 
unique functions in the steady state, independent of their capacity for 
DC differentiation (discussed later), and are circulating. Nevertheless, 
their potential as pre-DCs ascribes them a property to distinguish 
them from non-DC APCs such as B cells and macrophages. Other pre-
DCs, such as pre-conventional DCs (pre-cDCs) develop into DCs by 
default in the steady state (also discussed later). ‘Developed’ DCs, by 
contrast, are ‘dendritic’ when freshly isolated, even though there may 
still be differences in levels of ‘maturation’ or immunogenicity (see 
below).

Migratory
Migratory DCs are ‘born’ in the periphery, act there as sentinels for 
pathogens or peripheral self-antigen, then migrate via the lymphatics 
toward draining lymphoid organs. This process is usually accompa-
nied by a kind of maturation and occurs at a basal rate in the steady 
state20–22 so that they are found in the draining lymphoid organs as 
‘mature’ DCs.23 Surprisingly, this process can occur even in germ-free 
or Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling-independent scenarios.24,25 but 
can also be enhanced upon infection or inflammation.26,27 Subtle 
crucial differences other than major histocompatibility (MHC) class II 
levels, a classic activation marker, differentiate mature steady-state 
DCs versus mature pathogen-activated DCs. Factors can include co-
stimulatory molecules and cytokine production that must always be 
taken into account when determining any influence on T-cell fate.31 
Langerhans cells (LCs) and dermal DCs fit into the migratory DC 
category.

Resident
Lymphoid-tissue resident, or ‘simply resident DCs’, are located in all 
lymphoid organs of the steady state. They are distinct from migratory 
DCs in that they are not derived from the periphery, but rather from 
the BM. Resident DCs include the CD8+ cDCs, the CD11b+ cDCs, 
CD11c+ CD45RA+ MHC IIint cDC, which can be further broken into 
two broad subsets: the CD8+ cDC and the CD8− cDC.5,36 Most CD8− 
cDCs also express CD4 but are largely overlapping in function with 
those that do not.23,34

Circulating
Although it is clear that some pre-DCs, including pDCs and Ly6Chi 
monocytes, can circulate in blood and extravasate tissues depending 
on the circumstances, one should take care not to refer to these as 
circulating DCs. Some arguments favor that cDC migrate via the 
blood and can seed the spleen and lymphoid organs.34,35 However, 
CD11cHi cDC are actually not found in significant numbers in the 
blood,36,37 and only some in BM.38 The majority of CD11c+ cells in the 
blood are B220+ pDCs, DN5+ NK cells, MHCII− pre-DCs39 or 
Ly6Clo monocytes (which might also overlap with blood pre-
DC1).37,40,41 No cell freshly isolated from mouse blood has, to my 
knowledge, been demonstrated to be a good T-cell activator without 
prior hematopoietic development.37 Why this conflicts with the 
observation of DCs in human blood18 is unknown, but might be 
explained by ‘dirty’ humans versus ‘clean’ mice, or indicate a species 
difference.

THE PLAYERS
Monocytes
Monocytes can be pre-DCs, and are phagocytic cells of the myeloid 
lineage that are found in several organs, including blood, BM and 
spleen at low levels (Figure 1). Upon infection or inflammation, they 
are recruited into the bloodstream and organs for innate immune 
functions42,43 (Figure 2). They represent a relatively terminal stage in 
what is often referred to as the mononuclear phagocyte system, or 
MPS44 and probably derive from monocyte-DC precursors—

Table 1 DC classification

| DC stage       | Pre-DC       | Developed DC |
|----------------|--------------|--------------|
| 2 DC life history | Migratory    | Resident     | Circulating |
| 3 host state   | Steady state  | Inflammatory |
| 4 DC subtype   | The different DC subtypes |
| 5 DC activation state | Unactivated | Activated |

Abbreviations: DC, dendritic cell; pre-DC, precursors of DC.

Immunology and Cell Biology
```