```
Immunology and Cell Biology (2008) 86, 439–452
© 2008 Australasian Society for Immunology Inc. All rights reserved 0818-9641/08 $30.00
www.nature.com/icb

REVIEW

Demystifying the development of dendritic cell
subtypes, a little

Shalin H Naik

The broadest definition of dendritic cells (DCs) is white blood cells that can take up antigen, process it and then present
antigen-derived peptides to activate cognate naive T cells. Although this definition is by no means perfect, it is nevertheless now
textbook. The source of frustration more recently has focused on other issues, including the distinction of the DC subtypes, their
differential roles in the immune system, their lineage relationship to each other (and other leukocytes) and whether the mouse
and human DC findings overlap. Here, I condense the classification of DCs in both the steady state versus infection, with
primary focus in the mouse. Emphasis is then given to debates surrounding the in vivo pathways of DC differentiation in
different conditions, which culture models best represent these processes (fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 ligand versus granulocyte-
macrophage colony-stimulating factor), and what the human and mouse DC subtype equivalents might be. In addition, a model
termed ‘graded’ commitment is proposed that, as a departure from the classic binary models of hematopoiesis, attempts to
explain the recent clonal data where subtype-specific DC precursors branch from this pathway.
Immunology and Cell Biology (2008) 86, 439–452; doi:10.1038/icb.2008.28; published online 15 April 2008

Keywords: BDCA3; Tip DC; GM-CSF; Flt3; graded commitment; subsets

Prior to the 1970s, lymphocytes were regarded as an indistinguishable
group of cells, primarily because they appeared identical under the
light microscope. In fact, when Mitchell and Miller first wielded the
distinction term into T versus B lymphocytes, they were ridiculed
as ‘complicating the field’.1–3 In a case of history repeating, a similar
sentiment was given to those whom first identified the existence and
properties of the dendritic cell (DC) subtypes4–6—an exercise that was
often referred to ignominiously as ‘stamp collecting’. However, arising
from the early work of Shortman, Steinman, Moser, Hart, MacPher-
son and their colleagues, it is clear that DCs are not just the one cell
type simultaneously performing the entire repertoire of professional
antigen-presenting cell (APC) functions.

On the contrary, the DC subtypes appear to be distinct entities with
different life histories. They differ not only in phenotype, but also in
their genetic program, anatomic location, expression of receptors for
pathogen molecules and abilities to influence T-cell fate (reviewed in
Shortman and Naik7 and Villadangos and Schnorrer8). This speciali-
zation and division of labor presumably allows the immune system to
intricately ‘tailor’ an adaptive immune response appropriate for the
breaching pathogen—like having different generals for the army, navy
or air force. Yet despite clear differences in the DC subtypes and their
functions, evidence of their unique origins has only recently been
shown.

This review attempts to introduce the immune system’s putative
need for DC subtypes, briefly introduce the players, summarize some
aspects and controversies surrounding their development, investigate
the different culture models of DCs, introduce a new model to explain
branching of DCs at various stages of hematopoiesis and address the
potential human counterparts of the mouse DC subtypes. As this
review cannot be exhaustive, the reader is directed to a past thesis
available online for some further information.9

WHY SO MANY SUBSETS?
It may seem to those purveying the field that a new DC subtype is
discovered almost seasonally. The question is often asked, ‘Why do
models of the immune system require yet more DC subtypes?’ The
question should instead be, ‘The DC subtypes do exist, and appear to
have different functions—why might this be important?’ Otherwise,
one potentially follows the same cynicism of those whom discredited
the T- versus B-lymphocyte distinction. Granted, some phenotypic
differences mean little in the context of differentiation or function.
However, in other cases, such differences correlate to fundamentally
distinct cell types whose functions are worthy of unraveling—for both
understanding of the immune system, and for potential clinical
benefits.

As organisms become more complex throughout evolution, so too
did their immune system in order to better defend themselves, and
their ability to ‘play host’ to a greater range of microbes. Accordingly,
only since the emergence of the jawed vertebrates did the adaptive
immune system develop the important cytotoxic T and antibody-
forming B lymphocytes.10,11 The processes that link the innate
immune detection of pathogens to the instruction of the adaptive

Immunology Division, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Correspondence: Dr SH Naik, Immunology Division, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
E-mail: s.naik@nki.nl
Received 20 February 2008; revised 26 February 2008; accepted 28 February 2008; published online 15 April 2008
```