Distinct PKC-mediated posttranscriptional events set  
cytokine production kinetics in CD8+ T cells  
Fiamma Salernoa, Nahuel A. Paolinia, Regina Starkb, Marieke von Lindernb, and Monika C. Wolkersa,1  

aDepartment of Hematopoiesis, Sanquin Research/Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, 1066 CX, The Netherlands  
bDepartment of Hematopoiesis, Sanquin Research/Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, 1066 CX, The Netherlands  

Edited by Anjana Rao, Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine and La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA, and approved July 21, 2017 (received for review March 13, 2017)  

Effective T cell responses against invading pathogens require the concerted production of three key cytokines: TNFα, IFN-γ, and IL-2. The cytokines functionally synergize, but their production kinetics widely differ. How the differential timing of expression is regulated remains, however, poorly understood. We compared the relative contribution of transcription, mRNA stability, and translation efficiency on cytokine production in murine effector and memory CD8+ T cells. We show that the immediate and ample production of TNF-α is primarily mediated by translation of preformed mRNA through protein kinase C (PKC)-induced recruitment of mRNA to polysomes. Also, the initial production of IFN-γ uses translation of preformed mRNA. However, the magnitude and subsequent expression of IFN-γ, and of IL-2, depends on calcium-induced de novo transcription and PKC-dependent mRNA stabilization. In conclusion, PKC signaling modulates translation efficiency and mRNA stability in a transcript-specific manner. These cytokine-specific regulatory mechanisms guarantee that T cells produce ample amounts of cytokines shortly upon activation and for a limited time.  

T cells | cytokine production | PKC | mRNA stability | translation efficiency  

Effective CD8+ T cell responses require the production of three key cytokines: tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), IFN gamma (IFN-γ), and interleukin-2 (IL-2). Intriguingly, T cells release these cytokines in a serial fashion and not simultaneously (1, 2), reflecting their consequential functions. The immediate production of TNF-α facilitates apoptosis of infected cells and promotes leukocyte infiltration by regulating chemokine release and vascular permeability (3, 4). The slightly later-produced IFN-γ blocks microbial replication and potentiates innate immune responses by directly activating macrophages (5) and recruiting neutrophils (6). The survival and proliferation signals provided by IL-2 are required at later stages of activation. Importantly, all three cytokines have adverse effects when aberrantly produced, which results in immunopathology for TNF-α and IFN-γ (7, 8), and in activation-induced cell death of T cells for IL-2 (9).  

Several mechanisms drive cytokine production upon T cell activation. The transcription factors NFAT, AP-1, and NFκB are engaged downstream of Ca2+ signaling, protein kinase C (PKC), and MAP-kinase signaling (10–13). PKC, MAPK, and PI3K/AKT signaling can also control the turnover of cytokine mRNAs (14–16), whereas mTOR is critical to drive the translation of mRNA into protein (17, 18). How these regulatory networks feed into sequential cytokine production, however, is yet to be determined. We hypothesized that each cytokine employs custom-made regulatory pathways to obtain appropriate antimicrobial responses without inducing severe side effects. Here, we show that the timing of these three cytokines is determined by differential control of transcription, mRNA stability, and translation. Importantly, PKC signaling orchestrates this timing in a cytokine-specific manner.  

Results  
Sequential Production of Cytokines in T Cells. To determine the kinetics of cytokine release, we activated OT-I T cells for 6 h with OVA257–264 peptide/CD80 expressing cells (17). Activated T cells were removed from the antigen after 2 h and rested for 3–13 d in the presence of IL-7. We then reactivated these effector T cells with OVA257–264 peptide in the presence of brefeldin A (BFA) to block protein secretion and to measure the intracellular cytokine levels of TNF-α, IFN-γ, and IL-2.  

TNF-α was detectable within 30 min of stimulation and reached its plateau within the first 2 h, whereas IFN-γ and IL-2 were measured from 1 h and 2 h of activation onwards (Fig. 1A). Protein levels of all cytokines steadily increased until 6 h (Fig. 1A). Whereas this experimental setup displays the maximal capacity of cytokine production, it cannot distinguish whether cytokines are continuously or transiently generated. Therefore, we added BFA to activated T cells at later time points, for a maximum of 2 h (Fig. 1B). More than 90% of T cells produced TNF-α during the first hour, which dropped to 20% in the last 2 h of stimulation (Fig. 1B). IL-2 production also declined in the last 2 h, whereas IFN-γ production was robust over time (Fig. 1B). (1) At 2 h, the kinetics of cytokine production was independent of culture conditions with different cytokines, i.e., IL-7, IL-2, or IL-15 (Fig. S1A). Furthermore, the low-affinity T4 variant of OVA257–264 peptide (aa: SIITEKFL) (19) only altered the magnitude of response but not the kinetics (Fig. S1A).  

When T cells produce two or more cytokines, they represent the most potent effector cells against pathogens (20, 21). We found that the overall percentage of cytokine-producing T cells was constant, but the production profile evolved over time (Fig. 1C and Fig. S1B). TNF-α dominated the first 2 h (91 ± 4% of, which 54 ± 5% produced TNF-α alone, and 37 ± 6% in combination with IFN-γ and/or IL-2). At 4 h, most T cells (90 ± 2%) produced at least two cytokines. At 6 h, the T cell response shifted toward IFN-γ production (90 ± 5%, of which 48 ± 6% produced IFN-γ alone, and 51 ± 5% together with TNF-α and/or IL-2; Fig. 1C and Fig. S1B).  

Also, memory T cells rapidly produce cytokines upon reinfections (22). Indeed, naturally occurring CD44hi memory-like OT-I T cells that can protect from reinfections (23) showed similar production kinetics as in vitro-generated effector T cells, irrespective of antigen  

Significance  

A hallmark of effective T cell responses against invading pathogens is the production of effector molecules. Effector molecules such as cytokines not only kill infected cells, but they also recruit innate immune cells and alter the environment to optimally respond to microbial infections. However, because effector molecules are very potent, they can pose a health risk. When produced excessively or when generated at the wrong time, this aberrant production can induce immunopathology. Here, we uncover that each cytokine employs a private regulation of transcriptional and posttranscriptional events to guarantee appropriate production kinetics.  

Author contributions: F.S., N.A.P., and M.C.W. designed research; F.S., N.A.P., and R.S. performed research; F.S., M.v.L., and M.C.W. analyzed data; and F.S. and M.C.W. wrote the paper.  

The authors declare no conflict of interest.  

This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.  

1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: m.wolkers@sanquin.nl.  

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10. 1073/pnas.1704227114/-/DCSupplemental.  

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1704227114  

PNAS Early Edition | 1 of 6