```plaintext
PD1-ACR T cells for PDL1+ cancer therapy

8C). The in vivo targeting of PD1-ACR+ T cells 
upon PDL1+ cells in the tumor-loaded mice was 
evaluated by the overall localization of PD1 by 
immunohistochemistry and morphology. Immu- 
nohistochemical results showed PD1 expression 
in U87 tumor tissue (Figure 8D), which 
suggested that the PD1-ACR T cells had the 
ability to specifically target PDL1+ tumor tissue 
in vivo. Together, these results indicated that 
PD1-ACR+ T cells exhibited robust antitumor 
effects by specifically killing target cells.

Discussion

Constitutive endogenous PD1 upregulated 
expression has been observed by infiltrating T 
lymphocytes in solid tumors [22, 23], while 
tumors frequently co-opt immunoregulatory 
signaling pathways to evade immune recogni- 
tion and elimination. PDL1/2-PD1 interactions 
contribute to effector T cell exhaustion and 
clonal deletion as a mechanism of maintaining 
tolerance in normal immune physiology [3-7]. 
Tumor microenvironment PDL1/2 expression, 
therefore, is a significant obstacle against 
immunotherapy with either tumor specific cyto- 
toxic T cells (CTL), tumor infiltrating lympho- 
cytes (TIL) or chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) 
redirected T cells [24, 25]. Additionally, the 
absent or aberrant expression of MHC mole- 
cules by malignant cells possibly precludes the 
recognition by autologous MHC-restricted T 
cells [1, 2, 24, 25]. Our work focused on the 
development of an engineering strategy to 
equip T cells with the ability to circumvent 
PDL1-PD1 signaling by converting PDL1 to a 
ligand for T cell costimulation. And the PD1- 
CD28-4-1BB (PD1-ACR) is shown to convert 
PDL1 mediated inhibition to costimulation of T 
cells.

Naïve and memory T cells downregulate endog- 
enous CD28 expression and differentiate to 
effector T cells as a consequence of antigen 
activation [12, 13]. However, a chimeric antigen 
receptors (CAR) containing combined 4-1BB 
and CD28 signaling domains exhibited aug- 
mented proliferative responses, cytokine re- 
lease, antigen-elicited Granzyme B, expression 
of pro-survival proteins and cytolytic activity as 
compared to more moderate responses using 
chimeric antigen receptors expressing only 
4-1BB or CD28 signaling domains [13, 14].

Similarly, we demonstrated the functionality of 
PD1-ACR T cells by analyzing the upregulation 
of PI3K/pAkt pathway activity, production of 
inflammatory cytokines (IL2, IFN-γ and TNF-α) 
and proliferation in response to PDL1+ cell lines. 
PD1-ACR T cells proliferated in response to 
PDL1+ target cells. And this proliferation was like- 
ly due to the PD1-ACR T cells going through mul- 
tiple rounds of the rapid expansion protocol 
prior to being used in the proliferation assays. 
Our PD1-ACR T cells exhibited a PDL1 dependent 
reconstitution of CD28 and 4-1BB signal- 
ing, resulting in increased IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-2, 
proliferation and cytolytic activity. CD28 and 
4-1BB costimulation occurs preferentially when 
T cells encounter professional antigen present- 
ing cells that express B7-1 and -2, while PD1- 
ACR shifts the negative costimulation event to 
the positive costimulation and augments of 
CTL costimulation. Based on the restricted 
expression of both tumor antigen and PDL1, we 
therefore anticipate that the effect of PD1-ACR 
signaling will be more profound when effector T 
cells are present in the tumor microenviron- 
ment.

In vitro cytolytic activity was enhanced through 
PD1-ACR costimulation, while addressing the 
effect of the PD1-ACR on the endogenous TCR 
activity is an important extension of this work 
that needs to be examined. We hypothesize 
that PD1-ACR can serve to promote the anti- 
PDL+ tumor activity of engineered T 
cells expressing either endogenous TCR specif- 
ic for tumor antigens or the co-expression of 
this PD1-ACR, with the expectation that the 
costimulatory impact of the PD1-ACR will be fur- 
ther enhanced. Our findings indicated that PD1- 
ACR T cells exhibited a significantly higher cyto- 
toxicity than CTLs. Although these results sug- 
gests that ACR-based immunotherapies may 
be intrinsically superior to CTL approaches, TCR 
is dependent on endogenous proteins for the 
transduction of an activatory signal, unlike ACR 
molecules, which contain CD28 and 4-1BB sig- 
naling domains and the CD3ζ chain of the T-cell 
receptor (TCR) signaling complex [26, 27]. It 
should also be noted that TCR preferentially 
signal through ZAP70 tyrosine kinases, which 
may affect the strength of the transduced sig- 
nal [25-27].

Next, we assessed the antineoplastic potential 
of PD1-ACR T cells in the xenograft models of 

469

Am J Transl Res 2015;7(3):460-473
```