PD1-ACR T cells for PDL1+ cancer therapy

a result, PD1-ACR retains the ability to bind PDL1 resulting in the costimulation of primary T cells, as evidenced by the elevation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (Akt) activation, the augmentation of cytokine secretion, the increased proliferative capacity and the persistent activation of T cells. PD1-ACR T cells may cause on-target toxicity and tumor regressions in mice after therapy with gene engineered T cells.

Materials and methods

Cells and reagents

The U87, T98G and 293T cell lines were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were obtained from healthy donors and patients. Informed consent was obtained from the participants in accordance with the study protocols approved by the Institutional Review Board of Anhui University of Science & Technology. All cells were maintained in the RPMI1640 culture media (HyClone Laboratories, Logan, UT) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (HyClone Laboratories) and 2 mM L-glutamine (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Cells were maintained in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 at 37°C. The phospho-Akt (Ser473) and Akt antibodies were purchased from Cellular Signaling (Beverly, MA), β-actin were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO).

Construction of modified activating chimeric receptor

The PD1-activating chimeric receptor gene cassette which encodes a human PD1 extracellular segment including signal peptide (Uniprot: Q15116) denoted as PD1 in combination with the CD137 (4-1BB) intracellular costimulatory domain (Uniprot: Q07011) was fused in frame with CD28 transmembrane and intracellular domains (Uniprot: P10747). As the construct has the activation of T-cell function, hereafter was denoted as the PD1-CD28-4-1BB activating chimeric receptors (PD1-ACR). A (G4S) 3 peptide was used to link each functional fragment to a spacer domain derived from IgG4-Fc (Uniprot Database: P01861) comprising either ‘Hinge-CH2-CH3’, ‘Hinge-CH3’ or ‘Hinge-only’ sequence. Codon-optimized nucleotide sequences encoding each transgene were synthesized (SANGON Biological Engineering Technology Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China).

Vector construction and preparation of PD1-ACR encoding lentivirus

PD1-ACR was cloned into EcoR I and BamH I sites of lentiviral vector pCDH-EF1-T2A-puro (System Biosciences, CA). The new vector was named pCDH-PD1-ACR. Lentiviral PD1-ACR was generated by calcium phosphate co-transfection of HEK293T packaging cells with three plasmids, pVSV-G, pCMV-dR8.9 and pCDH-PD1-ACR, using the Fugene™ lipofection system (Roche) as described previously [15, 16]. The supernatants of transfected cells containing lentiviral particles were filtered (with 0.22 μm filters) and concentrated by ultracentrifugation. The titers were determined using the QuickTiter™ Lentivirus Quantitation Kit (Cell BioLabs). Supernatants with a titer of >10^7 infectious units/mL were collected and stored at -80°C.

Modification and expansion of PD1-ACR specific T cells

PBMCs were isolated using Ficoll-Paque (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) and cultured in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% FCS. The PBMCs were activated with 100 ng/ml Anti-CD3 (Nordic Biosite, Täby, Sweden) and 100 IU/ ml IL-2 (Proleukin, Novartis, Basel, Switzerland) for 2 days to selectively stimulate T cells. Activated T cells were transduced with the corresponding lentiviral particles at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of ~5 for 4 hours at 37°C in the presence of 10 μg/ml protamine sulphate as previously described [17]. Transduced cells were expanded in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% FCS. PD1-ACR expression was confirmed by confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) and IHC. Cell surface structures were detected with scanning electron microscope (SEM).

ACR mediated T cells activation and evaluation of ACR expression

When the highly purified CD8+ T cells transduced with PD1-ACR activated, they could express several kinds cytokines, ELISA was performed to measure the secretion of IFN-γ, IL-2 and TNF-α with the corresponding antibody sets (Duoset; R&D, Abingdon, UK). To correct for the different transduction efficiencies (determined using flow cytometry), data were normalized as [mean cytokine level]/% transduced T-cells × 100%.

462

Am J Transl Res 2015;7(3):460-473