```
ARTICLES                                                                                              NATURE CANCER

and melanoma models. Using distinct approaches including mosaic
tumors and intravital imaging with a real-time reporter of sig-
nal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) nuclear
translocation, we show that IFN-γ signaling occurs with extensive
bystander activity throughout the tumor microenvironment, affect-
ing both tumor and tumor-infiltrating immune cells. Although
STAT1 activity in tumor cells was sufficient, it did not require con-
tinuous interaction with T cells, confirming the extensive bystander
activity of intratumoral IFN-γ. We provide evidence that prolonged
IFN-γ exposure is in fact needed to alter overall cell phenotype. Our
results support a model in which IFN-γ regulates the tumor micro-
environment by acting as a widespread and sustained cytokine field,
which concentration is dependent on the collective T cell activity.

Results
T cell-derived IFN-γ profoundly modifies the tumor microenvi-
ronment. To characterize how intratumoral IFN-γ acts on tumor
cells, we examined the expression of several markers, including
MHC class I and PD-L1, in distinct tumor cell lines, in response
to various concentrations of IFN-γ. Using models for Myc-driven
B cell lymphoma (Eμ-myc)9, melanoma (B16.F10)10 and mammary
tumor (EO771)11, we observed a dose-dependent upregulation of
these markers for all cell lines (Fig. 1a,b, and see Extended data
Fig. 1a). Phenotype changes on IFN-γ treatment followed an analog,
rather than a digital, pattern with a concentration-dependent shift
in expression of the whole population rather than a bimodal distri-
bution (see Extended data Fig. 1b). At high concentrations, IFN-γ
also induced substantial cell death of B16.F10 tumor cells, an effect
even more pronounced after cells combined with tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-α (see Extended data Fig. 1c). By contrast, IFN-γ did
not affect the viability of Eμ-myc cells (Extended data Fig. 1d).

To test whether these phenotypic changes also occur in response
to intratumoral T cell-derived IFN-γ in vivo, we transferred Eμ-myc-
derived OT-I CD8+ T cells into Rag2−/− mice bearing the OVAhi
(Eμ-myc) lymphoma9 and measured phenotypic changes in
the bone marrow, a primary site of tumor growth (Fig. 1c, and see
Extended data Fig. 2). We used recipients devoid of endogenous
T cells for better control of the source of IFN-γ production. Trans-
fer of OT-I T cells at the tumor site was found to produce IFN-γ
(Fig. 1d). As shown in Fig. 1e, the transfer of T cells resulted
in an increased expression of MHC class I and PD-L1 on tumor
cells. Phenotypic changes were also detected in tumor-infiltrating
immune cells that expressed increased levels of MHC class I on
their surface (Fig. 1f). All these effects appeared to be dependent

on T cell-derived IFN-γ because they were abolished when IFN-γ-
deficient OT-I T cells were transferred. Importantly, these results
were recapitulated in Rag2−/−γ−/− recipients that lack NK cells, sug-
gesting that T cell-derived IFN-γ is sufficient to directly mediate
phenotypic changes in tumor cells (Extended data Fig. 3). To extend
these findings in a setting of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell
therapy, we analyzed the phenotypic changes in lymphoma cells on
transfer of IFN-γ either sufficient or deficient in anti-CD19 CAR
T cells. The presence of wild-type (WT) but not IFN-γ-deficient
CAR T cells resulted in a substantial increase in MHC class I and
PD-L1 expression (Fig. 1h). Altogether, these results indicate that
IFN-γ produced by T or CAR T cells has a broad impact on tumor
and tumor-infiltrating immune cells.

Tumor-infiltrating T cells selectively accumulate and arrest
in tumor areas with cognate antigen expression. Production of
IFN-γ by T cells has been associated with stable interactions with
antigen-presenting targets12. However, it is unclear whether IFN-γ
produced by T cells acts on engaged targets or their close neighbors
or more extensively in the tumor microenvironment. To address
this question, we needed to create mosaic tumors in which only
selective regions express a tumor antigen to spatially restrict IFN-γ
production (Fig. 2a). We took advantage of our previous observa-
tion that tumor subclones tend to grow as anatomically segregated
patches to create these disparate environments13. When we injected
a mixture of antigen-positive (OVA+) and antigen-negative Eμ-myc
tumors expressing distinct fluorescent proteins, we observed tumor
patches with a typical radius of 500 μm and a clear boundary
(Fig. 2b). Using intravital imaging, we found that most OT-I T cells
selectively accumulated in and arrested in antigen-positive areas
(see Extended data Fig. 4 and Supplementary Video 1). Tumor
regions bearing T cells seen in antigen-negative tumors were rapidly
cleared of T cells, indicating a spatially restricted IFN-γ production
(see Extended data Fig. 4 and Supplementary Video 1). Some
of the stable contacts with antigen-positive tumors may reflect
persistent sites of cytokine secretion because previous studies have
linked T cell arrest to IFN-γ secretion12. Even if it remains formally
possible that migrating T cells also released small amounts of cyto-
kine, the increased T cell numbers and residence time in antigen-
positive areas are consistent with cytokine release in these regions.
Of note, T cell arrest in antigen-positive areas was largely IFN-γ-
independent because prolonged interactions were also observed
with IFN-γ-deficient T cells (see Extended data Fig. 4). In sum, this
strategy provides a means to spatially control cognate interactions

Fig. 1 | T cell-derived IFN-γ induces phenotypic changes in the tumor microenvironment. a,b, IFN-γ induces phenotypic changes in tumor cells in vitro.
Eμ-myc B lymphoma (a) or B16.F10 melanoma (b) cells were stimulated with indicated IFN-γ concentrations in vitro for 24 h. H-2K+ (left), H-2D+ (middle)
and PD-L1 (right) surface expression was then analyzed by flow cytometry. Each dot represents the mean of three technical replicates, representing two
(B16.F10) or three (Eμ-myc) independent experiments; gMFI, geometric mean fluorescence intensity. c-g, T cell-derived IFN-γ increases MHC class I and
PD-L1 levels in tumor and tumor-infiltrating immune cells. c, Experimental setup. Rag2−/− mice were injected i.v. with OVA-expressing Eμ-myc B lymphoma
cells. On days 12–13, mice were activated WT or IFN-γ-deficient OT-I CD8+ T cells were injected i.v. After 2d, the recipient bone marrow was harvested and
analyzed by flow cytometry. d, Intracellular IFN-γ staining was performed in the absence of in vitro restimulation. Dot plots showing IFN-γ production
by intratumoral WT, but not IFN-γ-deficient, OT-I T cells (data represent n = 6 mice per group). e, Representative example of histograms showing H-2K+
surface expression on tumor cells isolated from the bone marrow of mice that were left untreated (filled gray) or injected with either WT OT-I T cells (line,
blue) or IFN-γ-deficient OT-I T cells (line, red). Data represent two independent experiments with n = 6 mice per group. f, H-2K+ (left), H-2D+ (middle)
and PD-L1 (right) surface expression on tumor cells isolated from mice either treated or not treated with the indicated OT-I T cell population, as assessed
by flow cytometry. Each dot represents one mouse. Red lines indicate mean values. Data represent two independent experiments with n = 6 mice per
group (**P < 0.001, two-tailed Mann-Whitney U-test). g, H-2K+ surface expression on NK cells (left), monocytes (middle) and neutrophils (right) isolated
from mice either treated or not treated with the indicated OT-I T cells, as assessed by flow cytometry. Red lines indicate mean values. Data represent two
independent experiments with n = 6 mice per group (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.001, two-tailed Mann-Whitney U-tests). h, Recipients with established Eμ-myc B
lymphoma were treated with anti-CD19 CAR T cells and analyzed 2d later. H-2K+ (left) and PD-L1 (right) surface expression on tumor cells isolated from
mice left untreated or treated with WT or IFN-γ-deficient CAR T cells. Red lines indicate mean values. Data represent two independent experiments with
n = 3 mice per group (****P < 0.0001 using ANOVA, with Tukey’s test for multiple comparisons).

                                                                                                                NATURE CANCER | www.nature.com/natcancer
```