```plaintext
NATURE CANCER

ARTICLES

ing to a homogeneous response, the intensity of which depends on 
the number of producing T cells (Fig. 3c). To distinguish between 
these two possibilities, we repeated our experiments with differ- 
ent numbers of T cells. We reasoned that, if IFN-γ is cell and a lim- 
ited number of tumor cells, lowering the number of T cells should 
reduce the frequency of responding tumor cells without affecting 
the intensity of their response (best modeled by a bimodal distribu- 
tion in tumor cell response) (Fig. 3c). By contrast, if IFN-γ primarily 
acted as a shared resource, reducing the number of T cells should 
decrease the intensity of the response in all cells (unimodal distri- 
bution of tumor cell response). Supporting the latter hypothesis, we 
found that a tenfold decrease in the number of transferred T cells 
resulted in a homogeneous reduction in MHC class I upregula- 
tion (Fig. 3f). Altogether, these experiments support the idea that 
IFN-γ diffuses extensively in the tumor microenvironment. As a 
result, the collective activity of IFN-γ-producing T cells generates a 
widespread field of IFN-γ, the concentration of which dictates phe- 
notypic changes across the whole tumor. We measured that, when 
transferring 2 × 106 OT-I cells, the ratio of OVA+ Eμ-myc cells to OT- 
I cells was approximately 1,000:1. By comparing the fold increase in 
MHC class I levels observed in vivo with that seen in vitro (Fig. 1a), 
we estimated that this T cell density resulted in an intratumoral con- 
centration of IFN-γ of around 1 ng ml−1 (see Extended Data Fig. 5a,b). 
This is obviously a rough estimate because several parameters 
could potentially differ between the in vitro and the in vivo settings 
(such as cytokine consumption or basal IFN-γ receptor (IFN-γR) 
expression). To test whether the activity of IFN-γ may influence 
tumor fate, we transferred tumors into wild-type or IFN-γR-deficient 
mice. We observed phenotypic changes in tumor cells, suggesting effec- 
tive diffusion in vivo, and most importantly found reduced tumor 
growth in wild-type mice, but not in IFN-γR-deficient mice (Extended 
Data Fig. 5c,d). This suggests that IFN-γ may influence tumor growth 
in vivo. This discrepancy may originate from an altered sensitivity 
of IFN-γ non-consumers to changes in IFN-γ expression, depending 
on tumor cells in vivo. To test how T cell-derived IFN-γ may 
affect tumor growth in vivo, we relied on our mosaic tumor system 
and compared the impact of T cell-derived IFN-γ on the growth 
of both antigen-positive and antigen-negative tumors. When reopi- 
net mice were transferred with IFN-γ-competent T cells, we observed 
that antigen-positive (OVA+) cells were eliminated, but also that 
the antigen-negative tumors partly regressed (see Extended 
Data Fig. 5e,f). This partial control was lost on transfer of IFN-γ- 
deficient T cells (see Extended Data Fig. 5e,f), supporting the idea 
that bystander IFN-γ activity may help limit tumor growth in vivo. 
To extend these findings to solid tumors, we generated mosaic 
tumors using the B16.F10 melanoma model. In this setup, again 
we observed haloes of IFN-γ signaling in both antigen-posi- 
tive (OVA+ B16) and antigen-negative (B16) cells in the presence 
of T cells (Fig. 3g–i). Thus, extensive bystander activity of T cell- 
derived IFN-γ is a property that also pertains to solid tumors.

Widespread and sustained STAT1 signaling in the tumor micro- 
environment. The observed bystander changes in tumor phenotype 
prompted us to better characterize the spatiotemporal dynamics of 
IFN-γ signaling in the tumor microenvironment. We focused on 
STAT1 translocation in tumor cells, because this represents an early 
event after cytokine exposure. To this end, we generated a fluores- 
cent reporter combining a STAT1–GFP (green fluorescent protein) 
fusion protein and a nuclear mCherry protein, and introduced this 
probe into Eμ-myc lymphoma cells. As expected, in the absence of 
stimulation, STAT1–GFP was cytoplasmic and excluded from the 
nucleus (Fig. 4a). On in vitro addition of IFN-γ, a more uniform 
(cytoplasmic and nuclear localization) distribution of STAT1–GFP 
was rapidly observed, confirming the translocation of a fraction of 
the STAT1–GFP pool (Fig. 4a). To quantify STAT1 translocation in 
multiple cells, we designed an automated image analysis pipeline 
based on the detection of cell and nuclear shape and computing of 
Pearson’s correlation coefficients between STAT1–GFP and nuclear 
mCherry signals (see Extended Data Fig. 6). With this strategy, sta- 
tistically distinct translocation scores were observed for cells in the 
presence or absence of IFN-γ (Fig. 4b). 
We therefore used these distinct patterns of STAT1 localization to 
identify cells with ongoing cytokine signaling in vivo by two-photon 
imaging. In a first model, we analyzed the response of H-2k B cell lympho- 
mas in response to Matrigel-embedded OT-I T cells, which expressed 
a H-2k-specific transgenic TCR. In female Rag2−/− mice that were 
sublethally exposed to these tumor–reporter mice, we predominantly 
observed evidence of cytokine signaling in a large number of 
tumor cells, which was confirmed by the clear colocalization in 
two-photon images (Fig. 4c,d) and confirmed by automated com- 
putation of STAT1 translocation scores (Fig. 4e). Importantly, STAT1 trans- 
location was widespread and detected in tumor cells irrespective of 
whether or not they were contacting T cells. Consistently, there was 
no correlation between STAT1 translocation scores in individual tumor 
cells and distance to the nearest T cells (Fig. 4f). Nuclear STAT1–GFP 
typically persisted throughout the imaging period (approximately 
1–2 h), suggesting sustained signaling (Fig. 4g, see Supplementary 
Video 2). To extend these results, we repeated these experiments in a 
second model relying on OVA+ Eμ-myc B cell lymphomas and OT-I 
CD8+ T cells. In this setup, nuclear STAT1–GFP was observed 
in the vast majority of tumor cells when OT-I effector CD8+ T cells 
were transferred but not in the absence of T cells (see Extended data 

Fig. 3 | Extensive bystander IFN-γ activity in the tumor microenvironment. a–f, Bystander activity of IFN-γ in the tumor microenvironment of B cell 
lymphomas. Rag2−/− mice were injected with either Eμ-myc cells alone or a 1:1 mixture of Eμ-myc and OVA-expressing Eμ-myc B lymphoma cells (labeled 
with different fluorescent proteins). On days 12–13, recipients were injected with OT-I T cells or left untreated. After 2 d, the bone marrow of the mice was 
recovered and analyzed by flow cytometry. a, Representative histograms of H-2k and PD-L1 surface expression of OVA-expressing (left) or OVA-non- 
expressing (right) Eμ-myc B lymphoma cells isolated from mice bearing mosaic tumors and injected with OT-I T cells (blue) or left untreated (filled 
gray). Data represent three independent experiments with n = 4 mice per group in each experiment. b–d, H-2k (b); H-2 (c) and PD-L1 (d) surface 
expression on tumor cells from mice injected with Eμ-myc cells only (black) or a 1:1 mixture of OVA-expressing (blue) and OVA-non-expressing (orange) 
Eμ-myc cells. Each dot represents one mouse. Black lines indicate mean values. Data represent three independent experiments with n = 4 mice per group 
in each experiment (*P < 0.05, two-tailed Mann–Whitney U-test). e, Proposed model of bystander IFN-γ diffusion in the tumor microenvironment (see text for 
details). f, Representative histograms of surface expression of H-2k and PD-L1 on H-2k+ on OVA-expressing tumor cells isolated from mice either left untreated 
(filled gray) or injected with 2 × 106 (light-blue line) or 2 × 105 (dark-blue line) OT-I T cells. Data represent n = 5 mice per group. g, Bystander activity of 
IFN-γ in solid tumors. Rag2−/− mice were injected with a 1:1 mixture of B16 and OVA-expressing B16 cells (labeled with different fluorescent proteins). After 
1 week, recipients were injected with OT-I T cells or left untreated. After 2 d, tumors were digested and analyzed by flow cytometry. H-2k (g), H-2 (h) or 
PD-L1 (i) surface expression is shown on tumor cells from mice injected with a mixture of OVA-expressing (blue) and OVA-non-expressing (orange) 
B16-F10 cells. Each dot represents one mouse. Black lines indicate mean values. Data represent two independent experiments with n = 4 mice per group in 
each experiment (*P < 0.05, two-tailed Mann–Whitney U-test).

NATURE CANCER | www.nature.com/natcancer
```