```plaintext
NATURE CANCER                                                                                                          ARTICLES

transient or prolonged exposure to IFN-γ is required to alter tumor 
cell phenotype. We therefore designed an experiment in which 
Eμ-myc B lymphoma cells are cultured for a fixed period of time 
(24 h), but exposed to IFN-γ during this period for variable amounts 
of time (by washing out the cytokine and adding a blocking anti- 
IFN-γ monoclonal antibody to prevent any residual effects). RNA- 
sequencing (RNA-seq) was then performed for these different 
stimulation patterns (Fig. 5a). We confirmed that sustained IFN-γ 
exposure resulted in sustained STAT1 translocation (see Extended 
Data Fig. 8). As shown in Fig. 5b, the core of the response that 
included well-known IFN-γ-responsive genes (Cd74, Cd274, H2- 
K1, H2-D1, and so on) required at least 6–24 h of cytokine exposure. 
Notably, cells exposed to IFN-γ for 1 h were barely distinguishable 
from unstimulated cells. We confirmed these findings at the protein 
level for H2-K, H2-D and PD-L1 using flow cytometry (Fig. 5d). 
In these settings, 6–24 h of cytokine exposure was needed for sub- 
stantial upregulation of these molecules. The need for long-lasting 
cytokine exposure was not restricted to B lymphoma cells because 
we observed a similar requirement for PD-L1 in melanoma cells 
(Fig. 5e). Altogether, these results suggested that sustained exposure 
to IFN-γ is needed to drive phenotypic changes in tumor cells, 
including MHC class I and PD-L1 upregulation. Our transcriptomic 
analysis also revealed a strong enrichment of interferon regulatory 
factor 8 (IRF8) and STAT1 motifs and that the expression of both 
transcription factors, IRF8 and STAT1, increased in response to 
IFN-γ (Fig. 5f). This raises the possibility that a two-step signaling 
activation, in which STAT1 and IRF8 upregulation by IFN-γ subse- 
quently amplifies the cellular response to this cytokine, accounts 
for the requirement for sustained cytokine exposure.

Similarly, when repeating the analysis with intratumoral neutro- 
phils, we observed an IFN-γ signature that correlated with the fre- 
quency of IFN-γ-producing T cells (Fig. 6c,f). These data suggest that, 
as observed in our mouse models, IFN-γ signals in multiple cell 
types of the tumor microenvironment. The observation that neu- 
trophils, which are not typical tumor antigen-presenting cells, also 
harbor the IFN-γ signature suggests that they have received IFN-γ 
signals in a bystander fashion. 
We also noted that, in patients with a high density of IFN-γ- 
producing T cells, the distribution of the IFN-γ signature on mono- 
cytes and neutrophils appeared unimodally shifted toward higher 
values (Fig. 6g). This observation is compatible with relatively uni- 
form IFN-γ activity in the tumor, which was also observed in head 
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients, as analyzed 
by single-cell RNA-seq in tumor cells (see Extended data Fig. 10). 
Future studies assessing the spatial distribution of IFN-γ-responsive 
genes in relation to T cell infiltration will help refine our under- 
standing of cytokine propagation and signaling in human tumors.

Discussion
In this present study, we established the spatiotemporal dynamics 
of intratumoral T cell-derived IFN-γ in models of B cell lymphoma 
and melanoma. We provided evidence that the collective activity of 
intratumoral T cells, together with cytokine diffusion, drives a tumor- 
wide response. Moreover, the formation of a sustained field of 
IFN-γ was required to alter tumor cell phenotype. 
The range of cytokine activity is dependent on the production 
rates and levels, diffusion and consumption by other cells7. Our 
results support the idea that T cell production of IFN-γ generates 
a widespread cytokine field sensed by most tumor cells and immune 
cells present in the lesion. This is consistent with the observation 
that the IFN-γ signature is not restricted to antigen-presenting cells 
(‘non-treated melanoma patients’). Overall, the number of tumor 
T cells were the major source of IFN-γ. We also found that the 
distribution of IFN-γ mRNA molecules were specific to these cells (Fig. 6a). 
We decided to investigate the impact of IFN-γ production on the 
tumor microenvironment by focusing on the monocyte/macro- 
phage population as a sensor of intratumoral IFN-γ. Of note, the 
low number of tumor cells present in the samples precluded us from 
performing the same analysis on these cells. By performing over- 
disperson analysis8, we identified the monocyte as a pathway9 (as 
in Extended data Fig. 9) specifically enriched in IFN-γ-responsive 
genes (Fig. 6b). Remarkably, the mean IFN-γ signature in mono- 
cytes/macrophages significantly correlated (R2 = 0.91, P = 0.001; 
Fig. 6c) with the frequency of IFN-γ-producing CD8+ T cells.

Fig. 4 | T cells mediate widespread and sustained STAT1 activity in the tumor microenvironment. a,b, Male Eμ-myc B lymphoma cells were transduced 
to express a STAT1–GFP reporter and a nuclear mCherry protein. STAT1 activity is measured on Eμ-myc B cells cultured in the absence or presence of 
recombinant IFN-γ. a, Images and graphs depict the quantification of STAT1–GFP (yellow) and nuclear mCherry (red) fluorescence intensity across 
the indicated lines for a representative cell before (top) and after (bottom) IFN-γ exposure. Scale bar, 5 μm. b, Translocation score was computed 
automatically for cells before or after IFN-γ exposure. Each dot represents one cell (unstimulated n = 106 cells; IFN-γ n = 135 cells; ***P < 0.001, two-sided 
Tukey’s range test; error bars indicate mean ± s.d.). c–e, Recipient female Rag2−/−gc−/− mice were injected with H2-K1+ Eμ-myc B lymphoma cells expressing the 
STAT1–GFP reporter and a nuclear mCherry protein. After 3 weeks, activated CD8+ T cells bearing the anti-HY MataHari TCR were injected i.v. After 3 d, 
recipients were subjected to intravital imaging of the bone marrow. c,e, Detection of nuclear STAT1–GFP in T cell-infiltrated tumors. c, Representative 
two-photon images (scale bar, 20 μm), highlighting the precise regions (insets, scale bar, 10 μm) of the tumor in mice either transferred or not 
transferred with MataHari T cells. d, Quantification of STAT1–GFP (yellow) and nuclear mCherry (red) fluorescence intensity across the indicated line for a 
representative tumor cell in mice either left untreated (top) or transferred with MataHari T cells (bottom). Scale bar, 5 μm. e, The translocation score was 
computed automatically from two-photon images obtained in mice left untreated (n = 60 T cells) or transferred with MataHari T cells. Each dot represents one 
tumor cell (n = 60 T cells) (n = 25 cells). MataHari T cells n = 115 cells; ***P < 0.001, two-sided Tukey’s range test; error bars indicate mean ± s.d.). 
f, STAT1 translocation in tumor cells is largely independent of the distance to the nearest T cells. The translocation score is graphed for each tumor cell as a 
function of the calculated distance to the nearest T cell. Each dot represents one cell (n = 115 cells; R represents Pearson’s correlation coefficient; statistical 
significance was assessed using Fisher’s test). g, STAT1–GFP translocation is sustained in vivo. Representative time-lapse images show the maintenance of 
STAT1–GFP translocation during the imaging period. Scale bar, 5 μm. Data shown in b–e represent two independent experiments with three mice per group 
in each experiment.

NATURE CANCER www.nature.com/natcancer
```