```plaintext
nature
cancer

ARTICLES
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-020-0038-2

Bystander IFN-γ activity promotes widespread
and sustained cytokine signaling altering the
tumor microenvironment

Ronan Thibaut1,2, Pierre Bost3,4,5,6, Idan Milo1,6, Marine Cazaux1,2, Fabrice Lemaître1, Zacarias Garcia1,
Ido Amit3, Béatrice Breart1, Clémence Cornuot1, Benno Schwikowski4 and Philippe Bousso1 ✉

The cytokine interferon (IFN)-γ produced by tumor-reactive T cells is a key effector molecule with pleiotropic effects during
anti-tumor immune responses. Although IFN-γ production is targeted at the immunologic synapse, its spatiotemporal activity
within the tumor remains elusive. In the present study, we report that, although IFN-γ secretion requires local antigen recogni-
tion, IFN-γ diffuses extensively to alter the tumor microenvironment in distant areas. Using intravital imaging and a reporter
for STAT1 translocation, we provide evidence that T cells mediate sustained IFN-γ signaling in remote tumor cells. Furthermore,
tumor phenotypic alterations required several hours of exposure to IFN-γ, a feature that disfavored local IFN-γ activity over
diffusion and bystander activity. Finally, single-cell RNA-sequencing data from melanoma patients also suggested bystander
IFN-γ activity in human tumors. Thus, tumor-reactive T cells act collectively to create large cytokine fields that profoundly
modify the tumor microenvironment.

IFN-γ is a key soluble effector molecule during anti-tumor immune
responses. Mice deficient for IFN-γ production are prone to
develop spontaneous or carcinogen-induced tumors, highlight-
ing the crucial role of this cytokine in tumor immunity1,2. Because
IFN-γ also plays an important role during tumor immunoediting3,
the absence of this anti-programmed death 1 (anti-PD-1) ther-
apy in mice has been shown to be dependent on IFN-γ production
by CD8+ T cells and the associated interleukin (IL)-12 production
by dendritic cells4. Moreover, in melanoma patients, acquired resis-
tance to anti-cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 therapy has been
associated with mutations in the IFN-γ signaling pathway5.

Several mechanisms have been described to explain the benefi-
cial impact of IFN-γ in the tumor microenvironment. For exam-
ple, IFN-γ can exert direct cytotoxic or cytostatic effects on tumor
cells6,7, and contribute to senescence and tumor ferroptosis8.
In addition, IFN-γ signaling on stromal cells can lead to reduced
angiogenesis in the tumor bed, limiting nutrients and oxygen
access9,10. IFN-γ signaling can also lead to major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class I upregulation, thereby increasing tumor sensi-
tivity to CD8+ T cell-mediated lysis11. Finally, IFN-γ orchestrates
the recruitment of natural killer (NK) cells, T cells and invariant
NK T cells to the tumor by triggering production of the chemokines
CXCL9, CXCL10 and CXCL11 (ref. 12).

Conversely, intratumoral IFN-γ may have detrimental effects on
the outcome of anti-tumor immune responses. In this regard, it has
been reported that IFN-γ increases tumor cell genomic instability13,
a process that may favor tumor escape from the immune pressure.
IFN-γ can also induce the expression of ligands for inhibitory recep-
tors such as PD ligand 1 (PD-L1) and PD-L2 on stromal and tumor
cells14, contributing to the inhibition of tumor-infiltrating T cells15,16.
IFN-γ could also induce the differentiation of tumor-reactive T cells by
favoring activation-induced cell death17. Finally, long-term IFN-γ
exposure has been associated with deep transcriptomic changes in
tumor cells that can contribute to the failure of immune checkpoint
blockade therapy18.

Despite our understanding of molecular and cellular mechanisms
triggered by IFN-γ, we critically lack information on the spatio-
temporal activity of this cytokine in the tumor microenvironment.
Quantitative rules regulating cell–cell communication are only
starting to be considered19 but are essential to understand complex
immune responses. Fundamental questions remain to be addressed.
Does IFN-γ act primarily in discrete areas or more widely in the
tumor microenvironment? How is IFN-γ spatially shaped by
the number of cytokine-producing T cells? What is the duration of
IFN-γ exposure required to alter tumor cell function and phenotype?
It is well established that IFN-γ is secreted by T cells in a directional
manner toward the immunologic synapse formed with target cells20.
On T cell receptor (TCR) stimulation, IFN-γ production is also
thought to be a brief (few hours) long event21. Although these two
features are expected to favor a local activity of IFN-γ around the
sites of cytokine production, the extent of IFN-γ diffusion in tissue
has yet to be fully understood. Indeed, using in vitro settings, it has
been shown that the immunologic synapse does not perfectly restrict
IFN-γ secretion, which accounts for bystander activity of IFN-γ
in cells that are not in contact with cytokine-producing T cells22.
Evidence for bystander IFN-γ activity has also been reported in vivo
in the mesenteric lymph node after Toxoplasma gondii infection23
and in the dermis infected with Leishmania major24. Yet, the extent
and functional consequences of IFN-γ diffusion in the microenvi-
ronment of distinct tumor types remain unclear.

In the present study, we investigated the spatiotemporal activity
of IFN-γ in the tumor microenvironment using B cell lymphoma

1Dynamics of Immune Responses Unit, Equipe Labellisée Ligue Contre le Cancer, Institut Pasteur, INSERM U1223, Paris, France. 2University Paris Diderot,
Sorbonne Paris Cité, Collège Pasteur, Paris, France. 3Department of Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. 4Systems Biology Group,
Center for Bioinformatics, Biostatistics, and Integrative Biology and USR 3756, Institut Pasteur CNRS, Paris, France. 5Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
6These authors contributed equally: Pierre Bost, Idan Milo. ✉e-mail: philippe.bousso@pasteur.fr

NATURE CANCER www.nature.com/natcancer
```