NATURE CANCER | www.nature.com/natcancer

ARTICLES

may favor the formation of relatively stable cytokine fields by tem- 
porarily increasing cytokine availability in the tumor microen- 
vironment. Binding of IFN-γ on the extracellular matrix should also 
achieve similar effects. It will be important to determine whether 
other cytokines rely on a similar global mode of signaling and assess 
how the superimposition of distinct cytokine fields may translate 
into complex biological responses at the tissue level, in particular in 
the context of the tumor microenvironment. This is particularly rel- 
evant for TNF-α which can act synergistically with IFN-γ to induce 
tumor cell death. Cytokine consumption plays an important role in 
shaping the spatial range of cytokine activity37, and may generate 
fields of different sizes for distinct cytokines, possibly creating func- 
tional heterogeneity in the tissue. 
In summary, our work provides new insights into the spatiotem- 
poral activity of intratumoral IFN-γ with important implications for 
anti-tumor immune responses. Single-cell RNA-seq, as illustrated 
here, but also spatial transcriptomics38,39, will help estimate the 
range of cytokine activity in human tumors. Finally, the use of sys- 
tems immunology, together with the development of new probes to 
image cytokine propagation and activity in vivo, will be essential to 
establish the rules of cytokine-mediated communication at steady- 
state or during disease pathogenesis.

Methods

Mice and cell lines. The 6- to 8-week-old C57BL/6 mice were purchased from 
Charles River. Rag2−/−, Rag2−/−γc−/−, Rag2−/− OT-I TCR, UBc-GFP Rag2−/− OT-I 
TCR, cyan fluorescent protein (CFP expressed under the actin promoter), Rag2−/− 
MataHari TCR and Ifngr1−/− mice were bred or crossed in our animal facility. All 
experiments were done in agreement with national guidelines and regulations 
and approved by the Institut Pasteur Committee on Animal Welfare (CETEA) 
under protocol code 170038. A lymphoid cell line was isolated from tumors 
generated by injecting 2 × 106 B16K1 melanoma cells in Rag2−/− mice. Tumor 
cells were retrovirally transduced with a construct encoding a single-chain 
truncated TCR specific for the SIINFEKL peptide (B16K1-OVA). The B16K1- 
OVA cell line was cultured in RPMI medium supplemented with 10% FCS, 
penicillin/streptomycin, 2 mM L-glutamine and 50 μM β-mercaptoethanol. 
B16K1-OVA cells were used for all in vivo experiments. 

Tumor models and T cell adoptive transfer. B cell lymphomas were established 
by injecting 1 × 106 Eμ-myc cells intravenously (i.v.) into the indicated recipients. 
Melanoma tumors were established by inoculating 2 × 106 B16K1 cells subcutaneously. 
Single-cell suspensions from MataHari TCR transgenic mice or OT-I TCR transgenic 
mice were isolated and red blood cells were removed by ammonium-chloride- 
potassium lysis. One-third of the cells was then pulsed with 50 μM H-2Db- 
restricted Uty_246 peptide (WMHHNMDLI) or H-2Kb-restricted OVA_258- 
276 peptide (SIINFEKL) for 1 h in RPMI medium 1640–Glutamax at 37 °C. All 
of the cells were incubated at 37 °C in complete medium supplemented with 
50 μg ml−1 of gentamicin. The two populations were mixed and cultured for 2–3 d. 
Cells were then subjected to Ficoll gradient centrifugation, to remove dead cells, 
and cultured in complete medium containing human IL-2 (25 IU ml−1; Roche) 
and IL-7. For power in vivo activation, IFN-γ-deficient T cells were generated 
with 100 ng ml−1 of IFN-γ (Invitrogen). Cells were used on day 4, with at least 
≥95% were CD8+ T cells. When indicated, T cells were retrovirally transduced to 
express cherry as described40. Tumor-bearing mice were adoptively transferred 
with cultured T cells by intravenous injection of 2 × 106 T cells. For experiments 
using CAR T cells, B cell lymphoma injection, conditioning and CAR T cell 
transfer were performed as previously described41.

Intravital two-photon imaging. Bone marrow imaging was performed as 
described42. Mice were anesthetized with a mixture of xylazine (Rompun, Bayer, 
10 mg kg−1) and ketamine (Imalgene, 100 mg kg−1), which was replenished by 
Dum- ing imaging, the temperature was maintained at 37 °C with a home heating 
Pad. Two-photon imaging was performed with an upright microscope (MPE-RS, 
Olympus) with a ×25/1.05 numerical aperture water-dipping objective (Olympus). 
Excitation was provided by an Insight DeepSee dual laser (Spectra-Physics) tuned 
at 920 or 980 nm. The following filters were used for fluorescence detection: 
CFP (483/32), GFP (520/35), YFP (542/27), background (595/35) and mCherry 
(624/40). To create time-lapse sequences, we typically scanned a 30- to 40-μm 
thick volume of tissue at 5-μm z-steps and 60-s intervals.

Image analysis. Videos were processed and analyzed using Imaris software 
(Bitplane) or Fiji software (ImageJ 1.50). Videos and figures based on two-photon 
microscopy are shown as two-dimensional maximum intensity projections of 
three- to seven-dimensional data. For optimal contrast rendering, videos were col- 
ored in yellow in some images. Contrast conditions were calculated manually, based 
on slope position between a given T cell and a tumor cell. For mean and absolute 
analysis of STAT1–GFP translocation, we developed an in-house MATLAB script 
that first automatically detects cell enveloped and nuclei, and then computes 
a translocation score. Briefly, STAT1–GFP and mCherry channels were aligned 
after first binarizing outside-cherry nuclei images along with a circular structuring 
element then applied to the STAT1–GFP channel image, followed by a filling of 
the holes. Euclidean distances from the border to the binarized 
cherry border using a watershed segmentation tool to segment the contiguous 
images for each identified cell. Pearson’s correlation between the STAT1–GFP and 
the mCherry signal is computed and considered as a good proxy for STAT1–GFP 
translocation (translocation score). This strategy was applied to both in vitro and 
in vivo data; however, due to the increased background signal in vivo, it was nec- 
essary to correct with a shaper parameter to avoid the underestimation of the 
translocation score, with a shaper parameter of size equal to the estimated size of 
the nucleus. For each experiment, a minimum of 20 cells was analyzed. 

Flow cytometry and antibodies. For ex vivo analyses, femurs and tibias were 
isolated from the tumor-bearing mice. Bone marrow cells were extracted 
by flushing the bones with phosphate-buffered saline supplemented with 1% 
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid and 0.5% fetal bovine serum (FACS buffer), and 
single-cell suspensions were prepared by filtering the cells through 70-μm cell 
strainers. For B16-bearing tumors, immune cells were harvested and sorted into 
concert by digesting the tumors with collagenase/DNase for 30 min at 37 °C, 
before crushing them on 70-μm cell strainers. All cells were then stained in FACS 
buffer, supplemented with 1% normal mouse and rat sera and 10 μg ml−1 of 
2.4G2 (clone 2.4G2, Bio X cell), using a combination of fluorescent or biotin-labeled 
monoclonal antibodies for the following: CD3 (53-6.7, BD Biosciences), CD4 
(RM4-5, BD), CD8α (53-6.7, BD Biosciences), B220 (RA3-6B2, BD Biosciences), 
B8.5, H-2Db (Biolegend, KH95), Ly6C (Biolegend, HK1.4), Ly6G (Biolegend, 
1A8), NK1.1 (Biolegend, PK136) and PD-1 (J43, BD Biosciences, 
10F2G2 or M1G5, respectively). IFN-γ intracellular staining was performed 
using the Cytofix/Cytoperm kit (BD Biosciences) according to the manufacturer’s 
guidelines and XMG1.2 monoclonal antibody (eBiosciences). IFN-γ expression 
was assayed in the presence of 1 μg ml−1 of brefeldin A. Samples were analyzed 
using a BD FACSCanto II or a Cytoflex LX (Beckman Coulter) flow cytometer. 
Data analysis was performed using FlowJo v.10.4.1 (TreeStar).

Tumor models and T cell adoptive transfer. B cell lymphomas were established 
by injecting 1 × 106 Eμ-myc cells intravenously (i.v.) into the indicated recipients. 
Melanoma tumors were established by inoculating 2 × 106 B16K1 cells subcutaneously. 
Single-cell suspensions from MataHari TCR transgenic mice or OT-I TCR transgenic 
mice were isolated and red blood cells were removed by ammonium-chloride- 
potassium lysis. One-third of the cells was then pulsed with 50 μM H-2Db- 
restricted Uty_246 peptide (WMHHNMDLI) or H-2Kb-restricted OVA_258- 
276 peptide (SIINFEKL) for 1 h in RPMI medium 1640–Glutamax at 37 °C. All 
of the cells were incubated at 37 °C in complete medium supplemented with 
50 μg ml−1 of gentamicin. The two populations were mixed and cultured for 2–3 d. 
Cells were then subjected to Ficoll gradient centrifugation, to remove dead cells, 
and cultured in complete medium containing human IL-2 (25 IU ml−1; Roche) 
and IL-7. For power in vivo activation, IFN-γ-deficient T cells were generated 
with 100 ng ml−1 of IFN-γ (Invitrogen). Cells were used on day 4, with at least 
≥95% were CD8+ T cells. When indicated, T cells were retrovirally transduced to 
express cherry as described40. Tumor-bearing mice were adoptively transferred 

Messenger RNA-seq and analysis. The mRNA-seq was performed on cultured 
cells. RNA was extracted using the NucleoSpin RNA (Qiagen) 
according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. RNA-seq libraries were prepared 
using the TruSeq stranded mRNA library preparation kit, in accordance with 
the manufacturer’s instructions. The total RNA was used for purification and 
fragmentation of mRNA. Purified mRNA underwent first- and second-strand 
complementary DNA synthesis, complementary DNA was then adenylated, 
and ligation of sequencing adapters and amplified by PCR using 10 cycles. 
Final libraries were quantified using fluorometric assays (including PicoGreen 
(Invitrogen) or Qubit fluorometer (Invitrogen) and Fragment Analyzer 
(Advanced Analytics)) or BioAnalyzer (Agilent 2100), and were sequenced on an 
Illumina HiSeq2500 sequencer (v4-chemistry using 2 × 125 basepair (bp) cycles). 
The processed RNA abundance was used for the mapping of the reads 
to the mouse genome using STAR and RSeQC. The reads were aligned with 
STAR (v.2.5.2a), and genes annotated in GENCODE vM16 were quantified with 
featureCounts (v.1.4.3-p1). Normalization and differential expression were done 
with the Bioconductor package DESeq2 (v.1.18.1). Differential expression analysis, 
as well as normalization, were performed using the DESeq2 package (v.1.18.1) on R 
(v.3.4.3). Analysis was performed by doing the log2(fold change) of the 
parameter that we set to tag/ppm. A gene was considered to be significantly 
differentially expressed if its corresponding adjusted P value was <0.01 and its 
absolute shrinked log2(fold change) > 1. Expression heatmap was performed using 
the pheatmap package, with Ward’s criterion used for the hierarchical clustering. 
The binding of specific transcription factor-binding motifs in the promoter 
regions of upregulated genes was performed using the iRegulon Cytoscape plugin43. 
Mus- 
musculus was chosen as the reference species and all other parameters were set to 
default. The top 50 transcription factor binding motif-ranking data sets that 
were scored to top-upstream regulatory genes.

Single-cell RNA-seq data clustering and analysis. The two single-cell RNA- 
seq datasets were downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) repository 
(accession numbers GSE123139 and GSE103322 for the melanoma and HNSCC 
datasets, respectively). Annotations were included using Ensembl GRCm38.p2 (v.42).