RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE

supplementation of AcCoA functionally restored T cell activation and suppresses programs, enabling the acquisition of effector programs that are otherwise suppressed by conditioning T cells in [K+]e. To examine whether these changes had an epigenetic basis, we provided acetate to T cells expanded under [K+]e conditions and measured H3K9Ac at the Ifng promoter and Acetylation Control loci (Fig. 5G). We found that provision of acetate increased acetylation of these hallmark chromatin sites associated with effector and activation programs. We also clearly visualized that DG62L, a phenotypic marker of effector T cells, is a direct acetylation of AcCoA. These findings reflect the capacity for AcCoA replenishment to restore effector programs across multiple time points collected throughout T cell activation (fig. S10, B to D). Thus, this metabolic intervention enabled the liberation of an effector phenotype in T cells by provision of acetate under [K+]e conditions, regardless of prior milieu. Furthermore, these results indicated that restoration of AcCoA was sufficient to normalize key aspects of effector programs even in conditions of [K+]e. In addition, we assessed the relationship between T cell differentiation and AcCoA abundance, as well as alternate means to manipulate AcCoA levels. Nicotoyxcolate CoA esters are generated by the conversion of citrate to AcCoA and oxaloacetate by ATP-citrate lyase (ACLY) in the cytosol (Fig. 5H). The compound 2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG), resulting in reduced nucleocytosolic AcCoA (42). We found that T cell exposure to 2-HG treatment again restored IFN-g production and ablated markers of autophagy (Fig. 5I, and fig. S12, A to D), indicating that modulation of AcCoA abundance that does not involve [K+]e can act primarily to determine T cell fate and function.

The impact of 2-HG on T cell persistence in vivo was assessed by adoptively transferring congenically marked pmel TCR transgenic CD8+ T cells treated with 2-HG and challenging the mice with vaccinia virus expressing hgp100. An increased persistence of 2-HC-treated cells was found 7 days after ACT, in comparison to control conditions (Fig. 5J and fig. S12E). After ACT, the treatment of both large established subcutaneous tumors and pulmonary metastases, 2-HC treatment of pmel T cells resulted in improved tumor treatment and host survival (Figs. 5, N and O, and fig. S12F). These data demonstrate that multiple means to alter the abundance of AcCoA abundance common epigenetic and metabolic mechanisms that can determine T cell function.

These findings led us further to investigate the role of autophagy as key T cell differentiation state. We observed that after [K+]e, those cells that harbored ongoing autophagy were more likely to express CD62L (Fig. 5F). To directly address whether intact autophagy was a requirement for T cell stemness after [K+]e conditioning of T cells, we employed CRISPR/Cas9-mediated disruption of the Atg7 locus, a gene obligate for autophagy (43). We found that Atg7 knockout (KO), T cells, in addition to enriched CD62L surface expression, indicating that autophagy was indeed required for the maintenance of stemness (Fig. 5G, and fig. S13C). Taken together, these data support a mechanistic relationship among autophagy, AcCoA metabolism, and [K+]e-mediated retention of stemness and suggest that the capacity for metabolic reprogramming is a prerequisite for CD8+ T cell response to [K+]e.

Increased [K+]e promotes selective induction of mitochondrial AcCoA synthetase 1 (Acss1)

Enzymes responsible for AcCoA metabolism in the mitochondria and cytoplasm include acetyl-CoA synthetase short-chain family members Acss1 and Acss2 (Fig. 6A). Prior investigations have found these enzymes to be induced under nutrient restriction as a starvation response, allowing for enhanced conversion of acetate to AcCoA to support cell survival (41, 43). Given our prior findings, we sought to delineate changes in these enzymes after exposure to [K+]e. Although we found that transcripts for both enzymes were higher under [K+]e conditioning, protein levels were elevated only for Acss1 (Fig. 6, B and C). We investigated whether expression of Acss1 or Acss2 could mediate metabolic reprogramming, and found that enforced expression of Acss1, but not Acss2, enhanced CD8+ T cell basal and maximal oxygen consumption (Fig. 6D), consistent with the idea that [K+]e induces mitochondrially oriented metabolism. On the basis of these observations, we explored whether Acss1 could mediate the program of T cells, including those used in therapeutic settings. We retrovirally transduced tumor-reactive CD8+ T cells to enable their constitutive expression of Acss1, and confirmed its localization to mitochondria (Fig. 6E). Metabolic analyses of these cells revealed exF-BPM and pS6 in cells overexpressing Acss1 (Fig. 6, G and H). Our findings are consistent with Acss1 induction, increased flux and mitochondrially oriented metabolism, as the metabolic features of memory T cells.

---

Fig. 5. Increased [K+]e-mediated metabolic reprogramming is required for CD8+ T cell survival and autophagy. (A) Rescue of [K+]e effects on cytoplasmic AcCoA by external acetate supplementation. (B and C) Representative FACS plot quantifications of effects of external acetate (B) and electroporated AcCoA(50 μM) (C) on CD62L surface expression in CD8+ T cells in the indicated conditions. Data are means ± SEM and are representative of two (A) or three [(B) and (C)] independent experiments. (D) Immunoblot showing reduction of autophagy in [K+]e by provision of external acetate. (E and F) Representative FACS plots and quantification showing augmentation of CD62L surface expression by provision of external AcCoA (50 μM). Data are means ± SEM and are representative of two independent experiments. (G) Quantifications of H3K9Ac enrichment by ChIP-PCR at the Ifng and Acetylation Control loci in the indicated conditions. Data are means ± SEM from at least three culture replicates. (H) Schematic of the molecular pathways, substrates, and associated enzymes involved in the generation of cytoplasmic AcCoA pools. CIT, citrate transporter; 2-HC, ACLY inhibitor (5 mM hydroxycitrate). (I) Quantification of cytoplasmic citrate and cytoplasmic AcCoA from the states related in the indicated conditions. (J) ChIP-PCR quantification showing reduced H3K9Ac deposition at the Ifng locus in 2-HC-treated cells. Data are means ± SEM and are representative of three (I) or two (J) independent experiments with n = 3 culture replicates per experiment. (K) Representative FACS plots of autophagy flux in the indicated conditions by measuring the loss of GFP in mCherry+ populations. (L) Representative FACS plots showing effect of external acetate supplementation on CD62L expression in 2-HC-treated cells. Data are means ± SEM and are representative of two independent experiments with n = 3 culture replicates per experiment. (M) Representative flow cytometry analysis (left) and absolute number quantification (right) of transferred Ly5.1+ CD8+ T cells in the splenocyte of tumor-bearing mice on day 7 in the indicated conditions. Data are representative of two independent experiments with at least n = 5 mice per group. (N and O) Antitumor efficacy (left) and survival rates in mice (right) bearing B16 tumors treated with pmel T cells cultured in control (n = 10) or 2-HC (n = 10). Tumor measurements were plotted as mean ± SEM for each data point; tumor treatment curves were compared by Wilcoxon rank sum test; animal survival was assessed by log-rank test. Data are representative of two independent experiments. (P) Representative flow cytometry analysis and quantifications showing reduced autophagic flux in CD62L+ populations. Data are means ± SEM and are representative of two independent experiments with n = 3 culture replicates per experiment. (Q) Representative flow cytometry quantification showing abrogation of increased CD62L expression driven by [K+]e, upon genetic ablation of Atg7 (highlighted in gray). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.0001 (two-tailed t tests).

Vodnala et al., Science 363, eaau0135 (2019) 29 March 2019

8 of 12