```plaintext
RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE

By contrast, we did not observe differences in 
H3K9Ac enrichment at constitutively expressed 
loci in T cells, such as CD8a, ATF3, or B2M (Fig. S4, 
D to G), or differences in total levels of H3K9Ac 
or H3K27Ac in response to 1K^hi (1K) conditioning 
(fig. S4H). Our data are consistent with the ob-
servation that histone acetyltransferase enzymatic 
activity and selectivity are modulated by levels 
of AcCoA. It is likely that existing acetyl groups 
have higher priority for AcCoA than those in-
volved in the addition of new acetyl groups, 
like those associated with T cell differentiation 
(5, 36).

To assess whether H3K9Ac correlated with 
chromatin accessibility, we compared our 
observed differential enrichment against a pre-
viously reported list of effector and exhaus-
tion factors generated by ATAC-seq analysis in 
T cells after chronic antigen stimulation (37). We 
found that H3K9Ac was negatively enriched at 
loci regulating the transcription of these genes 
after 1K^hi (1K) (Fig. 3F and fig. S5, B and C). 
Collectively, these data suggest that 1K^hi leads to 
depletion of nucleocytosolic AcCoA, triggering 
histone hypoacetylation and chromatin con-
densation at effector and exhaustion 
gene loci.

Elevated [K^+]_e maintains T cell 
stemness

T cell stemness generally been defined as the 
capacity for self-renewal, persistence, multipotency, 
and the ability to generate effector lineages. In 
cyclic effector functions such as cytotoxicity and 
the production of high levels of interferon-g 
(IFN-g) (2, 8, 23). These characteristics exist at a 
spectrum and coordinately shape a T cell’s 
metabolic and epigenetic states (2, 8, 23, 35). 
Multiple independent preclinical and clinical 
datasets have identified these “stem-like” fea-
tures to be highly favorable for cancer immuno-
therapy in the settings of immune checkpoint 
blockade and ACT (7, 13, 14). We have previously 
identified stem cell–like T cells as a subpopula-
tion that has not yet fully executed program-
ming but expresses the transcription factor Tcf7 
in the lymphoid homing marker CD62L (Sell, 
L-selectin), and the stimulatory molecule 
CD27 (8, 9, 23).

We found that 1K^hi conditioning triggered 
functional caloric restriction in T cells, driving 
a starvation response, thereby altering both cel-
lular metabolism and the epigenetic landscape 
of effector and stem-associated loci. To understand 
the impact of 1K^hi on the function and pheno-
type of antitumor T cells, we performed RNA-seq 
and found that the mRNAs for key markers of 
T cell memory formation and stemness, includ-
ing Bach2, Il7r, Bcl6, and Klf2, were compara-
tively enriched after exposure to 1K^hi (Fig. 4A). 
GSVA revealed that 1K^hi conditioning resulted 
in a transcriptional profile that parallels the sub-
set of CD8^+ T cells recently identified as T cell 
stemness and the capacity to respond to PD-1 
blockade in the setting of chronic antigen ex-
posure (15) (Fig. 4B).

T cell conditioning in 1K^hi, thus had the dual 
effect of reducing dominant activation and gene 
expression of T cell effector functions and pre-
serving a T cell gene signature with augmented 
stemness. This was confirmed by quantifying 
the preservation of Tcf7 transcript and protein 
(Fig. 4C and fig. S5D). We found that CD8^+ T cells 
exposed to 1K^hi, characteristic of the TME of 
treated with BaCl_2, maintained relatively higher 
expression of the lymphoid homing marker 
CD62L (Fig. 4D and fig. S5, E and F) and the 
costimulatory marker CD27 (Fig. 4E) and retained 
the capacity to robustly produce interleukin-2 
(IL-2) (fig. S5, G and H). These changes were co-
incident with reduced acquisition of effector func-
tion, expression of co-inhibitory surface markers, 
and the acute suppression of T cell target cyto-
lysis (fig. S5, I to K). 1K^hi conditioning also 
delayed the acquisition of effector function even 
after rechallenge in vivo (fig. S5L).

To understand the epigenetic basis underlying 
the sustained expression of stemness genes, we 
further examined the effects of 1K^hi on histone 
H3K27me3 methylation of Lys^27 in those TME 
(3K27me3), which recruits the polycomb re-
pressive complex with subsequent compaction 
of chromatin and suppression of transcription. 
Metabolite analysis under 1K^hi revealed deple-
tion of methionine and members of the methio-
nine cycle, including S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) 
and S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) (Fig. 1C and 
fig. S6A), with significant effect on the methio-
nine cycle and histone methylation and global 
abundance of H3K27me3 (fig. S6B). To evaluate 
the impact of 1K^hi on the methylation and chro-
matin, we assessed H3K27me3 deposition by 
ChIP-seq. Comparative analysis of whole-genome 
H3K27me3 enrichment revealed a loss of re-
pressive marks at the regulatory loci of stemness 
genes, including those that modulate Bach2, 
Il7r, Klf2, and Il2a (fig. S6C). Consistent with 1K^hi, 
mediated disruption of methionine abundance 
driving epigenetic preservation of T cell stemness 
we found an inverse enrichment for H3K27me3 
repression within stemness loci (fig. S6, D 
and E). These findings indicate that 1K^hi, de-
presses metabolites required for suppression of 
stemness-associated loci during T cell differentia-
tion (39). We found that ionic control of methio-
nine and epigenetic programs was consistent 
changes in extracellular potassium, because 
changes to sodium counteraction, tonicity, and 
serum osmolytess did not have a similar effect on 
T cell phenotype (fig. S6F and G). The mod-
ulatory effects of 1K^hi were restricted to 
CD8^+ T cells, and acquisition of effector programs 
was similarly delayed in CD4^+ T cells, with de-
creased IFN-g and preserved IL-2 production 
in the setting of 1K^hi (fig. S7, A to C).

Given the impact of conditioning T cells in 
1K^hi, on chromatin structure and gene expres-
sion, we sought to measure its impact on clini-
cally relevant human tumor-specific T cells, especially 
those specific for neoantigens. We therefore ob-
tained tumor-infiltrating T cells isolated from 
patient tumors and expanded them in the pres-
ence or absence of 1K^hi. Tumor samples from 
patients with diverse cancers including mela-
noma and other solid cancers of the colon, lung, 
and ovary were subjected to whole-exome se-
quencing to identify nonsynonymous mutations 
that result in the creation of potential neoantigens, 
the precise antigens recognized by each patient’s 
TIL were identified (table S1). We measured in-
creases in the percentages of cells expressing 
CD62L in these human TILs (Fig. 4, F and G, and 
S7D, and table S1). These findings were surprising, 
given that these T cell clonotypes had likely been 
chronically exposed to antigen.

To evaluate the effects of 1K^hi on antitumor 
T cell function in vivo, we used the adoptive 
transfer of pre 1K^hi T cells after activation in 1K^hi, to 
track mice bearing established B16 melanoma. 
We found that conditioning with 1K^hi, improved 
T cell persistence after adoptive transfer within 
secondary lymphoid organs and the tumor site 
(fig. S8, A to C). Furthermore, antitumor T cells 
conditioned in 1K^hi, had better medium potency, 
demonstrating a comparatively less differentiated 
state (CXCR3^hi TILs) within the tumor and spleen 
after adoptive transfer (Fig. 4H and fig. S8, D and 
E) and maintaining higher apoptotic flux (fig. S8, 
F and G). Both persistence and survival were 
significantly improved in mice receiving 1K^hi-con-
ditioned T cells (Fig. 4I). Similar effects 
were also observed in 1K^hi-conditioned 
antitumor CD4^+ T cells (fig. S9).

To further examine the capacity of 1K^hi to 
condition T cells and retain the epigenetic CD62L 
expression in TILs in vivo, we re-isolated CD62L^hi 
TILs from established tumors and restimulated 
them ex vivo with cognate antigen presented by 
CD90.2^+ hosts containing antigen-specific 
stimulation. We found that 1K^hi-conditioned 
T cells harbor greater capacity for recall re-
sponse to antigen (Fig. 4J), were maintained at 
greater proliferative and self-renewal after 
antigen rechallenge (fig. S9, A to E). We surmise 
that 1K^hi mediates a preservation of cellular 
stemness and protective characteristic of T cell 
stemness despite the dysregulatory 
environment of the TME.

Increased [K^+]_e preserves stemness 
by mediating AcCoA abundance 
and autophagy

T cells conditioned by 1K^hi, executed a star-
vation response that resulted in the lack of 
acquisition of effector function and the preser-
vation of stemness. Although this provides correla-
tion between these changes and the reduction of 
nucleocytosolic AcCoA, we sought to determine 
whether those associations were causal. To this 
end, we supplemented T cells with exogenous 
acetate, the immediate precursor of AcCoA, or 
directly overexpressed AcCoA into 1K^hi-treated 
cells (40, 41). We confirmed that these interven-
tions restored nucleocytosolic AcCoA (Fig. S5A) 
and subsequently observed a reduction in CD62L 
expression (Fig. 5, B and C) and autophagy (Fig. 
5D) in the setting of 1K^hi. Similarly, AcCoA or 
acetate provision restored T cell IFN-g pro-
duction despite prior conditioning with 1K^hi 
(Fig. 5, E and F, and fig. S10, A and B). Thus, 

Vodnala et al., Science 363, eaau0135 (2019) 29 March 2019 6 of 12
```