```markdown
RESEARCH

RESEARCH ARTICLE

IMMUNOMETABOLISM

T cell stemness and dysfunction in tumors are triggered by a common mechanism

Suman Kumar Vodnala1,2*, Robert Eil1,2,3*, Rigel J. Kishton1,2, Madhusudhanan Sukumar1,2, 
Tori N. Yamamoto1,2,4, Ngoc-Han Ha5, Ping-Hsien Lee1,2, MinLiwa Shin5†, 
Shashank J. Patel1,2‡, Zhiya Yu2, Douglas C. Palmer1,2, Michael J. Kruhlak6, Xiaoqing Liu7, 
Jason W. Locasale8, Jing Huang6, Rahul Roychoudhuri5, Toren Finkel9, 
Christopher A. Klebanoff10,11,12,13, Nicholas P. Restifo1,2§

A paradox of tumor immunology is that tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes are dysfunctional 
in situ, yet are capable of stem cell–like behavior including self-renewal, expansion, and 
multipotency, resulting in the eradication of large metastatic tumors. We find that the 
overabundance of potassium in the tumor microenvironment underlies this dichotomy, 
triggering suppression of T cell effector function while preserving stemness. High levels of 
extracellular potassium constrain T cell effector programs by limiting nutrient uptake, 
thereby inducing autophagy and reduction of histone acetylation at effector and 
exhaustion loci, which in turn produces CD8+ T cells with improved in vivo persistence, 
multipotency, and tumor clearance. This mechanistic knowledge advances our 
understanding of T cell dysfunction and may lead to novel approaches that enable the 
development of enhanced T cell strategies for cancer immunotherapy.

Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) are 
dysfunctional and can be frequently ob- 
served in a state of exhaustion in growing 
tumor cells. Nonetheless, these T cells of some 
patients maintain the capacity to be reinvigo- 
rated by immunotherapy and mediate the 
destruction of large tumor deposits (1). This is best 
illustrated by immunotherapy using a T cell– 
checkpoint blockade or adoptive cell transfer 
(ACT), which has emerged as one of the 
most important advances in cancer treatment 
in the past decade (2–5).

The existence of stem cell systems in mature 
organisms is now well established (6, 7), yet it has 
been less appreciated that some post-thymic 
T cells also harbor stem cell–like properties. 
However, like other adult stem cells in the gut, 
skin, and, most likely, other tissues, TIL-like T cells 
do not function like highly differentiated TILs 
progenitors with regard to the production of ef- 
fector cytokines and cytotoxicity (8–10). Each 
T cell specificity (clone) can retain key hall- 
marks of stem cells such as self-renewal, prolifera- 
tion, and multipotency. For example, TILs can 
be expanded ex vivo (11, 12) and readministered 
to cancer patients, resulting in clonal re- 
population and cure of disease, even of large 
metastatic tumor deposits (3, 8). Two other teams 
have previously identified the transcription factor 
Tcf7 as being critically involved in the retention 
of stem cell–like attributes in antigen-experienced 
T cells (9, 11). Although TILs have historically 
been thought to be terminally differentiated, Tcf7 
expression has defined a TIL subset harboring 
stem cell–like properties (8, 9, 11). However, 
the mechanisms that maintain this TCF7-positive 
TIL population are minimally understood. 
The differentiation of many T cells to memory 
and effector states is largely driven by the strength 
of the signals they receive, primarily via the T cell 
receptor (TCR). This maturation process can be 
subverted by many inhibitory signals that disrupt 
the signaling cascade after TCR ligation. The 
progression of T cell differentiation toward full 
effector function is metabolically driven in part 
by a metabolic program involving Akt-mTOR 
(mammalian target of rapamycin) signaling and 
heritable changes to the epigenetic landscape 
(16–18). This anabolic metabolism requires the 
continual uptake and consumption of extracel- 
lular nutrients, facilitated by a transmembrane 
electrochemical gradient present in all living 
cells (19). Maintenance of this electrochemical 
gradient involves the movement cation potas- 
sium, which has an intracellular concentration 
of ~145 mM, much higher than normally found 
in the extracellular space (~5 mM).

Despite tumor cell death, a higher density of 
necrosis is inversely correlated with patient sur- 
vival in some tumor histologies (20, 21). We pre- 
viously reported that necrosis leads to a profound 
alteration of the potassium ion gradient within 
the tumor microenvironment (TME) (22). Cellular 
necrosis liberates potassium and other intra- 
cellular contents into the extracellular space, which 
contains the tumor interstitial fluid (TIF). Dis- 
rupted tumor vasculature and abnormal lymphatic 
drainage lead to TIF stasis, causing tumors to be 
deprived of oxygen and crucial extracellular nu- 
trients, whereas the concentration of TIF potassium 
remains elevated. The increased extracellular 
potassium of the TIF acutely suppresses T cell 
effector function after TCR ligation, limiting T cell 
activation in a nonredundant manner to both 
PD-L1 and CTLA-4 immune checkpoints (22). Yet 
the impact of high levels of extracellular potassium 
([K+]e) on nutrient uptake, metabolism, epigenetics, 
and cellular differentiation has not been explored.

Here, we report experiments in which [K+]e 
was elevated in vitro and in vivo. Although 
nutrients despite adequate extracellular resources, 
we observed that the elevation of [K+]e in the 
extracellular space led to suppression of T cell 
starvation responses, leading to autophagy, which 
drove both metabolic and epigenetic reprogramming, 
thereby limiting the acquisition of effector func- 
tions and preserving Tcf7 and stemness. 
This epigenetic reprogramming was mediated by 
the depletion of nucleocytosolic acetyl-coenzyme 
A (AcCoA), which is available in AcCoA-de- 
creased histone acetylation, which in turn limited 
the activation of effector genes. Thus, we find that 
[K+]e characteristic of the TME attenuates AcCoA 
processing, generating antitumor T cells with 
enhanced persistence, engagement, self-renewal, 
multipotency, and tumor clearance—all charac- 
teristics of T cell stemness (23). These data help 
to resolve the current immunotherapy paradox 
as to why cancers progress despite the presence 
of T cells that harbor the capacity for rejuvena- 
tion and tumor eradication.

Elevated [K+]e triggers functional caloric 
restriction in T cells

We previously reported that [K+]e is character- 
istic of the TME (an additional 40 mM on 
average) and acutely stifles T cell effector func- 
tion (22), but the impact of [K+]e on the trans- 
membrane electrochemical gradient and its 
consequences in cell nutrient uptake and 
cellular metabolism remain unclear. We per- 
formed comprehensive metabolite analysis using 
liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry

Vodnala et al., Science 363, eaau0135 (2019) 29 March 2019 1 of 12
```