```plaintext
RESEARCH

RESEARCH ARTICLE SUMMARY

IMMUNOMETABOLISM

T cell stemness and dysfunction in 
tumors are triggered by a 
common mechanism

Suman Kumar Vodnala*, Robert Eil*, Rigel J. Kishton, Madhusudhanan Sukumar, 
Tori N. Yamamoto, Ngoc-Han Ha, Ping-Hsien Lee, MinhHwa Shin, 
Shashank J. Patel, Zhiya Yu, Douglas C. Palmer, Michael J. Kruhlak, Xiaojing Liu, 
Jason W. Locasale, Jing Huang, Rahul Roychoudhuri, Toren Finkel, 
Christopher A. Klebanoff, Nicholas P. Restifo†

INTRODUCTION: Cancers persist and pro-
gress despite the presence of tumor-infiltrating 
lymphocytes (TILs). A paradox of tumor im-
munology is that tumor antigen–specific TILs 
are dysfunctional in situ and yet can mediate 
regression of large metastatic tumors after 
immune checkpoint blockade or adoptive cell 
transfer. TILs are predominantly considered 
“exhausted” because of chronic antigen ex-
posure, but recent studies have revealed that 
T cells within tumors exist in a continuum 
of epigenetic, transcriptional, and metabolic 
states. A small subset of T cell clonotypes in 
TILs expressing the transcription factor TCF1 
possess stem cell–like behaviors including self-

renewal, multipotency, and persistence. Al-
though these cells appear to be responsible for 
tumor destruction in the setting of successful 
immunotherapy, the mechanisms underlying 
their generation and maintenance are unknown.

RATIONALE: To progress from a naïve, stem 
cell–like state after activation, T cells rely on 
the uptake and consumption of extracellular 
nutrients to enact robust aerobic glycolysis 
and mTOR-driven anabolic growth. In multiple 
organisms, the cellular response to starvation 
preserves stemness and enhances organismal 
longevity. Cellular necrosis is a feature of many 
solid tumors, and higher densities of necrosis 

are inversely correlated to patient survival. 
Necrotic cells release intracellular contents 
into the extracellular space. Because the intra-
cellular concentration of potassium is higher 
than the extracellular compartment (~145 mM 
versus ~5 mM), local potassium levels within 
the tumor interstitial space can exceed 40 mM. 
We hypothesized that elevated extracellular 
potassium found in tumor interstitial fluid 
would disrupt the electrochemical gradient that 
facilitates T cell nutrient uptake, simultaneously 
limiting the acquisition of effector programs and 
the coincident loss of stemness. In the present 
work, we sought to explore the impact of high 
levels of potassium found in tumors on T cell 
stemness and antitumor capacity.

RESULTS: We found that elevated extracel-
lular potassium characteristic of the extracel-
lular space within tumors reduced the uptake 
and consumption of local nutrients by anti-
tumor T cells, inducing a state of functional-
caloric restriction. A starvation response en-
sued, resulting in autophagy, mitochondrially 
dominant metabolism, and 
a paucity of available cofac-
tors obligatory for histone 
modification and the epi-
genetic remodeling required 
for progressive differentiation 
into effector cells. Both nucleocytosolic 
acetyl–coenzyme A (CoA) and methionine inter-
mediates were depleted. Depletion of nucleo-
cytosolic acetyl-CoA limited the acquisition of 
histone acetylation, one of the principal 
enhancers of genes encoding effector mol-
ecules. Simultaneously, potassium de-
reduced methionine intermediates, depressing 
methylation of histone markers that normally 
suppress stemness-associated programs. Treat-
ment of antitumor T cells with elevated extra-
cellular potassium as well as pharmacologic de-
gene therapies mimicking mechanisms of func-
tional starvation in T cells with retained 
stemness, evidenced by self-renewal and multi-
potency, thereby enabling the enhanced destruc-
tion of large, established tumors.

CONCLUSION: These data provide a link be-
tween tumor-induced immune suppression and 
the stem cell–like properties of some anti-
tumor T cells. Moreover, these findings deepen 
our understanding of how cancer can progress 
despite the presence of T cells that continuously 
harbor the capacity for its destruction. Finally, 
we identify new therapeutic strategies to meta-
bolically induce stemness programs in antitumor 
T cells that enhance cancer immunotherapies. 

Modified “Waddington valley” depicting T cell differentiation and the role of potassium in 
preserving T cell stemness. Left: Physiologic conditions driving T cell differentiation after 
activation (blue) to engage anabolic metabolism for acquiring effector functions (red). Right: 
Starvation response resulting from elevated extracellular potassium (↑[K+]e, white snow in valleys) 
drives catabolic metabolism and maintains T cell stemness. Height of the valley defines 
T cell potential to differentiate; segments of the valley define duration to reach senescence or death.

Vodnala et al., Science 363, 1417 (2019) 29 March 2019

ON OUR WEBSITE
Read the full article 
at http://dx.doi.
org/10.1126/
science.aat0315

The list of author affiliations is available in the full article online.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: restifon@mail.nih.gov
Cite this article as: S. K. Vodnala et al., Science 363,
eaat0315 (2019). DOI: 10.1126/science.aat0315

1 of 1
```