```plaintext
RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE

of T cells conditioned in [K+]e or control media 
containing ~5 mM K+. This analysis revealed 
that [K+]e exposure resulted in a significant 
reduction of glycolytic intermediates and essential 
amino acids within T cells (Fig. 1, A to C, and fig. 
S1A). These alterations were attributable to a 
reduction in electromotively coupled nutrient up- 
take, because T cells either acutely incubated in 
or treated with BaCl2, a nonselective inhibitor of 
potassium channels in the plasma membrane, 
had diminished uptake of fluorescently labeled 
glucose and lipid analogs, 2-NBDG and BODIPY 
FL C5, respectively (Fig. 1, D and E, and fig. S1, B 
and C). Neither T cell survival nor proliferative 
potential after restimulation were compromised 
by [K+]e-mediated reduction of nutrient uptake 
(fig. S1, D to F). We therefore propose that the 
decreased levels of intracellular anionic metabolites 
in the setting of unchanged extracellular nutrient 
abundance induce a metabolic state reminiscent 
of functional caloric restriction. These findings 
are consistent with those of previous studies in 
nonimmune cells that showed a close correlation 
of the transmembrane potassium concentration 
and membrane potential (Vm) with nutrient 
uptake and metabolism (24–27) (Fig. 1F).

Although most intracellular metabolites were 
depressed globally, we noted enriched levels of 
subsets of phospholipids species (Fig. 1G). These 
included phosphatidylinositol, phosphatidylser- 
ine, phosphatidylethanolamine, and CDP- 
diacylglycerol, which are known compounds and 
hallmark metabolites of the Kennedy pathway. 
The abundance of these compounds, as well 
as metabolites of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), 
an early initiator of autophagosome fusion and au- 
tophagy (Fig. 1G), was increased in human CD8+ 
T cells after [K+]e conditioning or revealed 
enrichment in Kennedy pathway intermediates 
(fig. S1G). Additionally, RNA sequencing (RNA- 
seq) analysis of primary T cells resulted in the 
presence or absence of [K+]e, demonstrated en- 
richment of mRNA in autophagy-associated 
transcripts (fig. S1D). These indicated that 
levels of [K+]e characteristic of the TIME result 
in selective accumulation of metabolites required 
for autophagosome maturation and a gene ex- 
pression signature indicative of ongoing autophagy.

Functional caloric restriction mediated 
by increased [K+]e promotes autophagy 
and metabolic reprogramming

We examined the acute effect of [K+]e on autophagic 
flux in live T cells, we used an eGFP cleaved from 
ferritin fluorescent protein mCherry-LC3b fusion 
protein system (29) (Fig. 2, A and B, and fig. S2A). 
Microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain beta 
(LC3) is hydrolyzed to expose Gly120 to create 
LC3-I (Fig. 1I). This mobile LC3 is then conju- 
gated with PE to generate LC3-II, enabling 
membrane expansion to create autophagosomes 
(30). An autophagy-competent construct con- 
taining a lysosome–Ala substitution (G120A) served 
as a negative control (Fig. S2A). G120A macro- 
scopy demonstrated loss of GFP fluorescence in 
Cherry fusion in the presence of [K+]e, indicating 
an autophagosome-lysosome fusion (Fig. 2C and 
fig. S2B). Concurrent flow cytometric analysis 
confirmed that [K+]e resulted in a greater propor- 
tion of mCherry+GFP– cells, suggesting ongoing 
autophagic flux (Fig. 2D). These dynamic changes 
in fluorescence were not attributable to artifi- 
cial spectral overlap, as the T cell surface marker 
Thy1 was used as an independent validation of 
transduction, reporter persistence, and increased 
autophagy in [K+]e-treated cells (fig. S2C).

The relative abundance of the autophagosome 
proteins LC3-I and the PE-conjugated form, 
LC3-II, were examined by immunoblot. We 
found that the LC3-I/II-LC3b-I ratio was elevated 
after [K+]e in both mouse and human T cells, 
consistent with increased autophagosome for- 
mation (Fig. 2, E and F) (30). Collectively, these 
data demonstrate that the amount of T cells exposed 
to [K+]e acquire a metabolic state defined by 
functional caloric restriction and ongoing auto- 
phagy. To investigate whether autophagy induced 
by [K+]e was related to a starvation response 
after depletion of intracellular nutrients, we mea- 
sured the activity of the mammalian target of 
adenosine monophosphate–activated protein 
kinase nutrient-sensing signaling cascades in 
both mouse and human CD8+ T cells. Increased 
[K+]e-mediated reduced phosphorylation of 
Ser637mTOR, Ser6RP (fig. S2, D to F), and two 
modulators of ribosomal activity, S6 (Ser235/ 
236; Fig. 2G and fig. S2G) and 4E-BP1 (Thr37/ 
46), respectively. Moreover, combined analysis revealed 
that the activity of the energy sensor AMPK (fig. 
S2H), similarly driving the observed in human 
CD8+ T cells, as evidenced by increased phos- 
phorylation of Ser385/6 (Fig. 2H), suggesting induc- 
tion of nutrient restriction (17).

We next sought to measure the consequences 
of this starvation response for the metabolic fitness 
of T lymphocytes expanding in the TIME. In conditions 
after [K+]e, T cells exhibited robust mitochondrial 
activity, as evidenced by marked spare respiratory 
capacity (Fig. 2I). [K+]e preserved the oxygen 
consumption capacity of human TILs after ac- 
tivation and proliferation, as well as that of 
TCR-engineered T cells (Fig. 2J and fig. S3A). 
Consistent with the induction of a mitochon- 
drially dominant program of cellular metabolism, 
we found that [K+]e-conditioned human CD8+ 
T cells maintained a lower mitochondrial mem- 
brane potential (ΔΨm) (fig. S3B). Scanning elec- 
tron microscopy of T cells expanded in [K+]e 
conditions revealed an increase in mitochondrial 
number and quality (fig. S3C), which suggests that 
T cells maintained mitochondrial integrity and 
the capacity for marked on-demand oxygen con- 
sumption. From these data, we conclude that cells 
subjected to [K+]e, had limited ongoing con- 
sumption of extracellular energy resources and a 
state existed with a resultant induction of autophagy 
and mitochondrially driven energy production.

Functional caloric restriction depletes 
nucleocytosolic AcCoA to suppress 
effector programs

The enhanced mitochondrial function of T ym- 
phocytes exposed to [K+]e led us to quantify 
AcCoA, a molecule that enables carbons derived 
from carbohydrates, fats, and proteins to be uti- 
lized in the citric acid cycle for oxidative phos- 
phorylation. AcCoA also serves as a substrate 
for histone and non-histone protein acetylation 
(31, 32). Because the mitochondrial membrane 
is impermeable to AcCoA, there are two dis- 
tinct pools of AcCoA in cells: mitochondrial 
and nucleocytosolic (the latter because cytosolic 
AcCoA can move freely across the nuclear pore 
complex) (Fig. 3A) (31). The quantity of AcCoA 
in the mitochondria is estimated to be several 
times that in the nucleocytosolic compartment. 
Thus, total cellular AcCoA is a surrogate for mito- 
chondrial AcCoA (33). In the setting of [K+]e, we 
observed an elevation in total cellular AcCoA, 
finding consistent with mitochondrial oriented 
metabolism (Fig. 3B).

Despite higher levels of total AcCoA, we mea- 
sured a reduction in nucleocytosolic AcCoA and 
its precursor, citrate, in T cells after [K+]e condi- 
tioning (Fig. 3C). These findings, along with a 
depletion of glycolytic products, suggested con- 
tinued generation and utilization of AcCoA 
within mitochondria in the TIME in oxidative 
phosphorylation. To determine the effect of 
[K+]e conditioning and consequent depressed 
glycolysis on T cell activation, we measured total 
acetylated Lys levels in mouse and human T cells 
(fig. 3D and fig. S4A). We observed a notable reduc- 
tion in the sum of acetylated Lys characteristic 
of the effector T cell state (17).

The acetylation of histone proteins acts to 
disrupt T cell chromatin structure and promote 
a euchromatic structural organization of the 
relaxed gene transcription (34). We sought to 
assess the potential epigenetic changes that 
related to the limited acetylated availability of 
AcCoA in the setting of [K+]e. Therefore, we 
performed chromatin immunoprecipitation and 
deep sequence analysis (ChIP-seq) of acetylated 
Lys9 and Lys27 of histone H3 (H3K9; H3K27Ac) 
and found decreased acetylation at both residues 
for Ifng regulatory loci (Fig. 3E), to obtain a whole- 
genome map of histone acetylation (H3K9Ac) 
and AcCoA consequent chromatin accessibility, 
performed ChIP sequencing (ChIP-seq). We ob- 
served reduced acetylation of the promoter and 
enhanced Ifng loci, as well as loci associated 
with T cell activation and exhaustion, including 
Pdcd1 (PD1), Ctla4 (B24), Havcr2 (Tim-3), and 
Klrg1 (Fig. 3, F and G, and fig. S4, B and C). We 
then performed RNA-seq under the same condi- 
tions to measure the functional consequences of 
H3K9 acetylation, with concordant results.

To visualize patterns of changes to H3K9Ac at 
a whole-genome level, we plotted relative change in 
Lys9 versus Lys27 for differentially acetylated loci of 
effector genes (Fig. 3H, left, and fig. S4A). We 
found a notable reduction in activating H3K9Ac 
histone marks at regulatory elements associated 
with T cell effector and exhaustion programs. 
Quantification by gene set enrichment analysis 
(GSEA) revealed that H3K9Ac acetylation was 
indeed lost at sites responsible for activation of 
exhaustion “Tim3” versus “KCRUS” (PD) and ef- 
fector transcriptional programs (Fig. 3H, right).

Vodnala et al., Science 363, eaau0135 (2019) 29 March 2019 3 of 12
```