```plaintext
high purity of the preparation (Fig. 1, left panel). When part 
of the gel was transferred to a PVDF membrane and blotted 
with anti-HMGB1, a single band with essential identical 
size was detected, indicating the identity of the band was 
indeed HMGB1 (Fig. 1, right panel).

HMGB1 is a chemoattractant for Mo-DCs

To test if HMGB1 could act as a chemoattractant for DCs, 
we first examined if HMGB1 could induce the migration of 
Mo-iDCs using a commonly used, 48-well microchemotaxis 
chamber assay with CXCL12 as a positive control (Fig. 2). 
rHMGB1 induced the migration of Mo-iDCs in a dose-depen- 
dent manner with a peak response at 10 ng/ml (Fig. 2A). 
rHMGB1 showed similar activity (Fig. 2B). Even at the optimal 
concentration of 10 ng/ml, the number of iDCs migrated in 
response to rhHMGB1 or rHMGB1 was approximately half of 
that migrated in response to an optimal concentration of 
CXCL12 (Fig. 2A) or CCL5 (Fig. 2B), suggesting that HMGB1 
was less efficacious than CXCL12 and CCL5 in terms of 
attracting iDCs. Neither rhHMGB1 nor rHMGB1 at the concen- 
trations tested induced the migration of mature DCs (mDCs), 
which as expected, did not migrate in response to CCL5 but 
migrated in response to CCL21 (Fig. 2C).

To test whether HMGB1-induced migration of Mo-iDCs 
was a result of chemotaxis or chemokinesis, we determined 
if addition of HMGB1 together with iDCs into the upper 
wells of the chemotaxis chamber could desensitize the mi- 
gration of iDCs in response to HMGB1 in the lower wells. As 
shown in Figure 3, compared with background migration of 
iDCs (first bar), rhHMGB1 and CCL5 in the lower wells 
induced migration of iDCs (second and fifth bars, respec- 
tively). Addition of identical concentration of rhHMGB1 into 
the upper wells significantly suppressed the migration of 
iDCs in response to rhHMGB1 in the lower wells, suggesting 
homologous desensitization (fourth bar). The desensitization 
was not a result of inhibition of cell motility, as identical 
concentration of rhHMGB1 in the upper wells did not reduce 
the background migration (third bar). In addition, the de- 
sensitization was specific, as neither rhHMGB1 desensitized 
CCL5-induced iDC migration (sixth bar) nor did CCL5 
desensitize rhHMGB1-induced iDC migration (seventh bar). 
Similar results were obtained with the use of rHMGB1 (data 
not shown). These results established HMGB1 as a chemoat- 
tractant for iDCs.

HMGB1 chemoattracts iDCs in a Gi-protein- and 
RAGE-dependent manner

Most chemokines and chemoattractants, upon binding to their 
receptors, cause the activation of heterotrimeric Gi protein, 

Fig. 1. SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis of rhHMGB1 preparation. 
rhHMGB1 sample (1 μg) was loaded into a gradient mini-SDS-PAGE gel with 
SeeBlue2 as a molecular size marker. After electrophoresis, the gel was sliced, 
one lane was stained with Coomassie Brilliant blue (CBB; left panel), and one 
lane was Western blotted (WB) with anti-HMGB1 after transfer onto a piece of 
polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane (right panel). The bands are 
marked by arrowheads.

Fig. 2. HMGB1 induction of DC migration. Human Mo-iDC migration, in 
response to rhHMGB1 (A) or rHMGB1 (B). Shown are the results (mean±SD of 
triplicate wells) of one experiment representative of three to four performed 
with iDCs generated from monocytes isolated from different healthy donors. 
*, P < 0.05, when compared with background migration (open bar). (C) 
Migration of DCs matured by treatment with LPS (1 μg/ml) for 48 h in response 
to rhHMGB1, rHMGB1, and selected chemokines. CXCL12, CCL5, and CCL21 
were used at their optimal concentrations (100 ng/ml).

Yang et al. HMGB1 induction of DC migration and activation 61
```