```plaintext
High mobility group box-1 protein induces the migration and 
activation of human dendritic cells and acts as an alarmin

De Yang,*†,1 Qian Chen,* Huan Yang,* Kevin J. Tracey,‡ Michael Bustin,§ 
and Joost J. Oppenheim*

*Laboratory of Molecular Immunoregulation, Center for Cancer Research, and ‡Basic Research Program, 
SAIC-Frederick, Inc., National Cancer Institute at Frederick, Maryland, USA; §Laboratory of Biomedical Science, 
North Shore-Long Island Jewish Research Institute, Manhasset, New York, USA; and †Laboratory of Metabolism, 
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA

Abstract: High mobility group box-1 (HMGB1) 
protein is a nonhistone, DNA-binding protein that 
plays a critical role in regulating gene transcrip-
tion. Recently, HMGB1 has also been shown to act 
as a late mediator of endotoxc shock and to exert 
a variety of proinflammatory, extracellular activi-
ties. Here, we report that HMGB1 simultaneously 
acts as a chemoattractant and activator of den-
dritic cells (DCs). HMGB1 induced the migration 
of monocyte-derived, immature DCs (Mo-iDCs) 
but not mature DCs. The chemotactic effect of 
HMGB1 on iDCs was pertussis toxin-inhibitable 
and also inhibited by antibody against the receptor 
of advanced glycation end products (RAGE), sug-
gesting that HMGB1 mediates its chemotactic 
activity via RAGE in a G protein-coupled manner. 
In addition, HMGB1 treatment of iDCs up-regulated DC surface markers (CD80, CD83, 
CD86, and HLA-A,B,C), enhanced DC production 
of cytokines (IL-6, CXCL8, IL-12p70, and TNF-
α), switched DC chemokine responsiveness from 
CCL5-sensitive to CCL21-sensitive, and acquired 
the capacity to stimulate allogeneic T cell prolifera-
tion. Based on its dual DC-attracting and -activat-
ing activities as well as its reported capacity to 
promote an antigen-specific immune response, we 
consider HMGB1 to have the properties of an im-
mune alarmin. J. Leukoc. Biol. 81: 59–66; 2007.

Key Words: RAGE • chemotaxis • maturation • HMGB1

INTRODUCTION

High mobility group box protein 1 (HMGB1) is a nonhistone, 
chromatin-binding protein, which was isolated from calf thy-
mus more than 30 years ago [1]. HMGB1, an abundant, 215 
amino acid residue-containing nuclear protein present in all 
mammalian tissues and cells, also known as amphoterin, is 
highly conserved among various species and structurally orga-
nized into two DNA-binding domains (termed A and B box) and 
a negatively charged C-terminal tail [2, 3]. Studies focusing on 
its capacity to bind and/or to introduce sharp bends or kinks in 
DNA double helix and to interact with other transcriptional 

factors have established HMGB1 as an important architectural 
facilitator of the assembly of nucleoprotein complexes that 
regulate gene recombination and transcription [4–6]. Knock-
ing-out of the mouse Hmgb1 gene results in the postnatal death 
of Hmgb1−/− mice as a result of a lack of expression of the 
glucocorticoid receptor [7].

In 1999, HMGB1 was discovered to act as a late mediator of 
endotoxic shock [8] that has nurtured the subsequent search for 
the extrachromosomal activities and functions of HMGB1, 
which can be released by necrotic cells [9, 10] or secreted by 
activated macrophages [8, 11–13], dendritic cells (DCs) [14], 
or NK cells [15]. It has been suggested that the secretion of 
HMGB1 requires sequential acetylation, relocation from nu-
cleus to cytosol, sorting to exocytosome, and extracellu-
lar disposal [16], a process that can be suppressed by 
aspirin in vivo and in vitro [17]. HMGB1 can be released 
by binding to the receptor of advanced glycation end products 
(RAGE) [17, 18]. Extrachromosomal HMGB1 has been shown 
to mediate inflammation [3, 8, 13], to regulate the migration of 
monocytes [19], to induce the migration and proliferation of 
smooth muscle cells and mesoangioblasts [20, 21], to contrib-
ute to DC maturation and induction of immune responses [3, 
10, 14, 22, 23], and to exert a direct, antibacterial effect [24].

Investigation of the effects of antimicrobial peptides and 
proteins such as defensins, cathelicidin, and eosinophil-de-
rived neurotoxin on leukocytes have revealed that apart from 
their direct, antimicrobial activity, these so-called “endoge-
nous antibiotics” also have direct chemotactic and activating 
activities for various subpopulations of leukocytes including 
DCs in vitro and can promote an antigen-specific, immune 
response when coadministered with a given antigen in vivo 
(reviewed in ref. [25]). Based on their rapid production by cells 
of the innate immune system in response to infection or tissue 
injury, their dual roles as chemoattractant and activators for 
antigen-presenting DCs, as well as their capacity to enhance an 
antigen-specific immune response, we have proposed to clas-
sify those endogenous mediators as alarmins, which rapidly 
galvanize inflammatory and host defense against exogenous 

1 Correspondence: SAIC-Frederick, Basic Research Program, Rm. 31-19/Bldg. 
560, 1050 Boyles Street, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. E-mail: dyang@ncifcrf.gov 
Received March 7, 2006; revised May 19, 2006; accepted May 22, 2006. 
doi: 10.1189/jlb.0306164

Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 81, January 2007 59
```