```plaintext
10624    ZELINSKY ET AL.                                                                                                           J. VIROL.

Naive          CD43+ CD8+ cells
CD8+           Acute  Persistent

perforin

granzyme B

b-actin

FIG. 6. Western blots for perforin and granzyme B. CD8+CD43+
T cells were purified from spleens of FV-infected mice at 2 weeks
postinfection (acute) and 8 weeks postinfection (persistent), and ana-
lyzed by Western blot using anti-perforin and anti-granzyme B anti-
bodies. Protein lysates of CD8+ T cells from naive mice were used as
a negative control, and immunoblotting with anti-b-actin was used to
quantify the protein content in each lane. The two bands for perforin
are the inactive precursor protein and the activated protein that has
been proteolytically cleaved (49).

Furthermore, the transferred cells were low in granularity,
suggesting a defect in cytolytic granule formation.

Evidence from CD4+/CD8+ T-cell cotransfer experiments
indicated that CD4+ regulatory T cells from persistently in-
fected mice rapidly suppressed the effector functions of trans-
ferred CD8+ T cells. Presumably, the endogenous population
of virus-specific CD8+ T cells studied in the current experi-
ments would be under the same immunosuppressive pressure
by CD4+ regulatory T cells, likely contributing to their loss of
effector functions. Additionally, it has been shown in the lym-
phocytic choriomeningitis virus model that chronic stimulation

by antigen can lead to exhaustion of CD8+ T-cell effector
functions such as interleukin-2, tumor necrosis factor alpha,
and gamma interferon secretion (52). Since virus-specific
CD8+ T cells in mice persistently infected with FV are also
subject to chronic antigenic stimulation, exhaustion may also
play a role in their dysfunction.

Loss of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte killing mediated by regula-
tory T cells has previously been noted (11, 28, 30, 48, 54), but
little is known about why cytolytic activity is lost or what types
of mechanisms induce loss. One in vitro study of human cyto-
toxic T-lymphocyte demonstrated that CD4+CD25+ regula-
tory T cells suppressed perforin and granzyme B mRNA tran-
scription (7). This result contrasts with our finding that
inhibition was predominantly at the posttranscriptional level,
but that difference could be due to in vitro versus direct ex vivo
experiments. More consistent with our findings, a study of
dysfunctional cytotoxic T-lymphocyte function in human im-
munodeficiency virus-infected humans showed that perforin
protein expression was down-regulated posttranscriptionally
(45).

Functional impairment of CD8+ T cells has been described
for patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus and
in patients with hepatitis C virus (4, 17, 23, 31, 33, 37, 50). Both
viruses are genetically highly variable and escape from CD8+
T-cell responses by mutations in T-cell epitopes has been dis-
cussed as a major reason for the loss of CD8+ T-cell activity in
chronic infected carriers (35, 36, 40). However, other evidence
suggests that several viral epitopes of human immunodefi-
ciency virus and hepatitis C virus are recognized by CD8+ T
cells throughout the chronic phase of infection (16, 27, 53) and
that viral loads in infected patients are more associated with
functional properties of CD8+ T cells than with viral mutations
(16, 23, 31, 33). Interestingly, in both human immunodeficiency
virus and hepatitis C virus infection CD4+ regulatory T cells
have been described to suppress antiviral T-cell responses (1,
2, 3, 26, 32, 51). Thus, impairment of CD8+ T-cell function via
regulatory T cells may be a mechanism contributing to virus
escape and the establishment of chronic infections.

It is likely that suppression of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte func-
tion has evolved as a mechanism to control the immunopatho-

Perforin

Granzyme A

Granzyme B

Perforin mRNA copies
per 10^6 copies of b-actin mRNA

Granzyme A mRNA
copies per 10^6 copies of b-actin mRNA

Granzyme B mRNA
copies per 10^6 copies of b-actin mRNA

Naive  Acute  Persistent

Naive  Acute  Persistent

Naive  Acute  Persistent

FIG. 7. mRNA levels for cytotoxic molecules in activated CD8+ T cells. Levels of transcripts for perforin, granzyme A, and granzyme B from
effector (CD43+) CD8+ T cells isolated from acutely (2 weeks postinfection) and persistently (8 weeks postinfection) infected mice were compared
by quantitative real-time PCR. The 18S RNA was used as internal standard. The mean and standard deviation of six mice per group are shown.
The difference between the groups of acutely and persistently infected mice were only significant for granzyme B (P = 0.043) but not for perforin
(P = 0.93) or granzyme A (P = 0.54). Statistic analysis was done by Mann-Whitney test. Similar results were obtained in two independent
experiments.
```