```plaintext
JOURNAL OF VIROLOGY, Aug. 2005, p. 10619–10626                                                                 Vol. 79, No. 16
0022-538X/05/$08.00⫹0 doi:10.1128/JVI.79.16.10619–10626.2005
Copyright © 2005, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

CD8ⴙ T-Cell Dysfunction due to Cytolytic Granule Deficiency in 
Persistent Friend Retrovirus Infection

Gennadiy Zelinsky,1 Shelly J. Robertson,2 Simone Schimmer,1 Ronald J. Messer,2
Kim J. Hasenkrug,2† and Ulf Dittmer1*†

Institut fuer Virologie des Universitaetsklinikums Essen, Essen, Germany,1 and Laboratory of Persistent 
Viral Diseases, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, Montana2

Received 18 January 2005/Accepted 20 May 2005

Virus-specific CD8ⴙ T cells are critical for the control of acute Friend virus (FV) infections, but are rendered 
impotent by CD4ⴙ regulatory T cells during the chronic phase of infection. The current study examines this 
CD8ⴙ T-cell dysfunction by analyzing the production and release of cytolytic molecules by CD8ⴙ T cells. CD8ⴙ 
T cells with an activated phenotype (CD43ⴙ) from acutely infected mice produced all three key components of 
lytic granules: perforin, granzyme A, and granzyme B. Furthermore, they displayed evidence of recent degran-
ulation and in vivo cytotoxicity. In contrast, activated CD8ⴙ T cells from chronically infected mice were 
deficient in cytolytic molecules and showed little evidence of recent degranulation and poor in vivo cytotoxicity. 
Evidence from tetramer-positive CD8ⴙ T cells with known virus specificity confirmed the findings from the 
activated subset of CD8ⴙ T cells. Interestingly, perforin and granzyme A mRNA levels were not significantly 
reduced during chronic infection, indicating control at a posttranscriptional level. Granzyme B deficiency was 
associated with a significant decrease in mRNA levels, but posttranscriptional control also appeared to 
contribute to deficiency. These results demonstrate a broad impairment of cytotoxic CD8ⴙ T-cell effector 
function during chronic retroviral infection and explain the inability of virus-specific CD8ⴙ T cells to eliminate 
persistent virus.

Many viruses such as herpesviruses, hepatitis viruses, and 
retroviruses evade immunological destruction during acute in-
fection and establish chronic (persistent) infections that may 
culminate in life-threatening diseases. We have used infection 
of mice with Friend virus (FV) as a model to study basic 
mechanisms of immunological control and escape during a 
chronic retroviral infection (14, 21, 24, 25, 46). FV is a retro-
viral complex that induces lethal leukemia in most strains of 
mice. However, resistant strains of mice exist that develop 
potent immune responses which allow recovery from acute 
infection (13, 22). Mice that recover from acute infection never 
completely clear virus and remain persistently infected for life 
(10, 19). Virus levels are low during the persistent phase of 
infection, and B cells serve as the predominant reservoir for 
persistent virus (21).

The resolution of acute FV infection requires complex im-
mune responses, including antibodies, CD4ⴙ T cells, and 
CD8ⴙ T cells (20, 41). CD8ⴙ T cells are critical for recovery, 
as CD8-deficient or -depleted mice develop high viral loads 
and severe disease (19, 20, 41). Critical factors in the CD8ⴙ 
T-cell-mediated control of acute FV infection are secretion of 
gamma interferon (15, 38, 39), and production of the cytotoxic 
molecules perforin, granzyme A, and granzyme B (55).

In contrast to acute infection, depletion of CD8ⴙ T cells 
during chronic infection does not affect virus levels, suggesting 
that the chronic virus had somehow escaped the CD8ⴙ T-cell 
response (21). It has previously been shown that FV was not 
latent during chronic infection, nor had the virus directly es-
caped recognition by virus-specific CD8ⴙ T cells. Virus-specific 
CD8ⴙ T cells adoptively transferred into persistently infected 
mice were rapidly activated and proliferated as well as the 
same cells transferred into acutely infected mice. However, the 
CD8ⴙ T cells transferred into persistently infected mice failed 
to develop effector function as they did when transferred into 
acutely infected mice. Cotransfer experiments indicated that 
CD4ⴙ regulatory T cells from persistently infected mice sup-
pressed the ability of virus-specific CD8ⴙ T cells to produce 
gamma interferon and eliminate infected cells (14).

The current study extends results from these adoptive 
transfer experiments to the endogenous population of FV-
specific CD8ⴙ T cells and investigates the defects at the mo-
lecular level. All three of the major molecules involved in 
cytotoxicity were analyzed: perforin, granzyme A, and gran-
zyme B. The results showed deficiencies in all three proteins 
compared to CD8ⴙ T cells from acutely infected mice. Inter-
estingly, the regulation of protein expression varied from pro-
tein to protein, with only granzyme B being regulated at the 
transcriptional level. These results suggest the possibility that 
multiple upstream signals control cytotoxic granule content.

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Institut fuer Virologie, 
Universitaetsklinikum Essen, 45122 Essen, Germany. Phone: 49(201) 
7233693. Fax: 49(201) 723-5292. E-mail:ulf.dittmer@uni-essen.de.
† Both authors contributed equally to the design and documentation 
of this study.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Mice. Experiments were done using C57BL/10 ⫻ A.BY/F1 mice (H-2b/b, 
Fv1b/b, Fv2r/r, Rfv3r/s). All mice were females 8 to 16 weeks of age at the begin-
ning of the experiments. Animals were treated in accordance with the regulations 
and guidelines of Germany or the Animal Care and Use Committee of the Rocky 
Mountain Laboratories of the National Institutes of Health.
```