```plaintext
10620     ZELINSKY ET AL.                                                                                                          J. VIROL.

Virus and virus infection. The FV stock used in these experiments was FV 
complex containing B-tropic Friend murine leukemia helper virus (F-MuLV) 
and polycythemia-inducing spleen focus-forming virus (29). The stock was pre-
pared as a 10% spleen cell homogenate from BALB/c mice infected 14 days 
previously with 3,000 spleen focus-forming units of uncloned virus stock. Persist-
ently infected mice were mice that had been infected as above at least 8 weeks 
prior to experimentation and which had recovered from acute splenomegaly. 
Spleen virus levels in persistently infected mice were generally stable at approx-
imately 104 infectious centers per spleen for 6 to 8 weeks postinfection (46).

In vivo cytotoxicity assay. The in vivo cytotoxic T-lymphocyte assay described 
by Barber et al. (5) was modified to measure cytotoxicity in FV-infected mice. 
Briefly, FV-expressing FBL-3 and control EL-4 tumor cells were stained with 20 
nM and 200 nM 5-(and 6)-carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFSE), 
respectively. The labeled cells (107 cells of each population) were then injected 
subcutaneously into the indicated groups of mice. 24 h later the injection site was 
surgically removed. The tumor cells were then separated from the skin using a 
metal filter and analyzed for CFSE fluorescence by flow cytometry. Target cells 
were distinguished from one another based on CFSE staining brightness. The 
percent killing was calculated by the formula 100 – [(% FBL-3 in infected/%
EL-4 in infected)/(% FBL-3 in uninfected/% EL-4 in uninfected) × 100].

Intracellular granzyme staining and flow cytometry. Cell surface staining was 
performed using Becton Dickinson (Heidelberg) reagents. T-cell antibodies were 
anti-CD3, directed against the activation-associated glycosylated isoform of 
CD43 (1B11), anti-CD4 (RM4-5), anti-CD8 (53-6.7), and anti-CD107a (1D4B). 
Dead cells (7AAD or propidium iodide positive) were excluded from all flow 
surface analyses. Intracellular granzyme A (polyclonal rabbit-anti-mouse gran-
zyme A immunoglobulin G [IgG], protein A purified) and granzyme B (mono-
clonal rat-anti-human granzyme B antibody, allophycocyanin-conjugated; clone 
CB12, Caltag Laboratories, Hamburg) staining was performed using the Cytofix/
Cytoperm intracellular staining kit (Becton Dickinson, Heidelberg). After label-
ing for cell surface markers the spleen cells were washed and intracellular 
staining for granzyme B was performed according to the manufacturer’s proto-
col. Granzyme A was reacted with a polyclonal rabbit-anti-mouse granzyme A 
IgG antiserum (kindly provided by M. Simon) and stained with a fluorescein 
isothiocyanate-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibody (Dianova, 
Hamburg, Germany). Data were acquired on a FACScalibur flow cytometer 
(Becton Dickinson, Heidelberg, Germany) from 30,000 to 80,000 lymphocyte-
gated events per sample. Analyses were done using B.D. Cellquest Pro software 
(version 4.0, Becton Dickinson, Heidelberg, Germany).

Quantitative PCR. Total RNA was extracted from 106 CD43+ CD8+ T cells by 
using the RNeasy Mini kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. mRNA was transcribed by incubating total RNA 
with an oligo(dT)15- primer (500 ng; Pharmacia, Freiburg, Germany) and 
RevertAid H Minus Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (Fer-
mentas, St. Leon-Rot, Germany) as advised by the manufacturer. The resulting 
cDNA was used as a template for 18S rRNA (housekeeping gene), granzyme A, 
granzyme B, and perforin amplification in the LightCycler system (Roche Diag-
nostics, Mannheim, Germany) by using FastStart DNA Master SYBR Green I 
(Roche, Basel, Germany). Primers used for expression of the cytotoxic mole-
cules or 18S were used for quantification of mRNA molecules.

The primers used were as follows: perforin (380 bp), 5' GCT GGT GCAA 
GAT CTC C 3' (sense) and 5' GAC AGG AGT ACA ACA GAT GCA GC 3' 
(antisense); granzyme A (360 bp), 5' GGG GAT CTA AGT CTA GTT GGA 3' 
(sense) and 5' ATT GCA GGA GTC GTT TCC ACC AA 3' (antisense); gran-
zyme B (135 bp), 5' TCA GGG TCC TGA TCC TTC AGT G 3' (sense) and 
5' ATG AAG TTC CTC TGG CTA CTG 3' (antisense); 18S rRNA (99 bp), 5' 
GCC ACC CGC CCC TAC C 3' (sense) and 5' CGG GCG GGT CAT 
GGG AAT AAC 3' (antisense).

Infectious-center assays. Serial dilutions of spleen cells from infected mice 
were plated onto susceptible Mus dunni cells, cocultivated for 3 days, fixed with 
ethanol, stained with F-MuLV envelope-specific monoclonal antibody 720, and 
developed with peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG and substrate to 
detect foci of infected cells.

Tetramers and tetramer staining. The D’GagL tetramers were constructed by 
Ton Schumacher and Ton Schumacher (The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Am-
sterdam, The Netherlands) using a peptide in which the cysteine residues 
were replaced with alanine hydroxyl acid to prevent irretrievable disulfide bond-
ing, as has been described (44). This variant peptide is recognized by polyclonal 
D’GagL-specific CD8+ T cells as determined by intracellular gamma interferon 
staining. For detection of D’GagL-specific CD8+ T cells, nucleated spleen cells 
were dual stained with fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled anti-CD8 (Lyt-2) (BD 
Pharmingen, Heidelberg, Germany) and phycoerythrin-labeled major histocom-
patibility complex class I H-2Db tetramers specific for the FV GagL peptide (9)

for 15 min at room temperature. Cells were washed two times, resuspended in 
buffer containing trypan blue, and analyzed by flow cytometry.

Western blotting. CD8+ CD43+ T cells were isolated from spleens of FV-
infected (C57BL/10 × A.BY)F1 mice at 2 weeks postinfection (acute) and 8 
weeks postinfection (persistent). CD8+ T cells were first enriched by positive 
selection using anti-CD8 MicroBeads and magnetically activated cell sorting 
(MACS, Miltenyi Biotech, Auburn, Calif.). CD8+ enriched cells were then 
stained with anti-CD43-fluorescein isothiocyanate (1B11) and anti-CD8-allophy-
cocyanin (53-6.7) (BD Biosciences-Pharmingen, San Jose, Calif.). CD8+ CD43+ 
T cells were sorted on a FACSAria flow cytometer (BD Biosciences-Immuno-
cytometry Systems) from a population gated on side scatter, forward scatter, and 
exclusion of propidium iodide.

Protein samples were prepared from 8 × 106 highly purified CD8+ CD43+ T 
cells (>96%) using the M-PER reagent containing the HALT protease inhibitor 
cocktail (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, Illinois). Protein from approximately 
2.4 × 106 cell equivalents was separated on a 10% Tris-HCl Ready Gel (Bio-Rad, 
Hercules, Calif.), and transferred to Immobilon P membranes (Millipore, Bil-
lerica, Mass.). The membranes were probed with rabbit anti-mouse perforin 
antibody (Torrey Pines Biolabs, Houston, Texas), with an horseradish peroxi-
dase-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (Pierce) and revealed by chemilumines-
cence (SuperSignalWest Pico, Pierce). For quantification, the blots were stripped 
and reprobed sequentially with rabbit anti-actin antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, St. 
Louis, Missouri) and horseradish peroxidase-labeled anti-rabbit IgG and re-
vealed by chemiluminescence.

RESULTS

Virus-specific CD8+ T cells with a cell surface effector phe-
notype were present in mice persistently infected with FV.
Previous experiments showed that virus-specific CD8+ T cells 
adoptively transferred into persistently infected mice rapidly 
became activated and proliferated as well as when transferred 
into acutely infected mice (14). Thus, poor antigen presenta-
tion could not account for lack of CD8+ T-cell function in 
persistently infected mice. Flow cytometry revealed the expan-
sion of activated CD8+ T cells during acute infection that was 
still present during chronic infection as measured by expres-
sion of the activation-associated glycoform of CD43 (B) (Fig. 
1A). During both phases of infection, a large majority of the 
CD43+ CD8+ T cells were also positive for CD69, a very early 
activation marker, indicating recent engagement with antigen 
(data not shown).

To ensure that the activated population of CD8+ T cells 
reflected the properties of virus-specific CD8+ T cells, the cells 
were stained with a major histocompatibility complex class I 
tetramer specific for cells recognizing the H-2Db-restricted 
F-MuLV glycosylated Gag epitope (H-2DbGagL) (44). The 
mean percentage of activated tetramer-positive CD8+ T cells 
was significantly increased in both acutely and persistently in-
fected mice, although it was lower in persistently infected ani-
mals (Fig. 1B) consistent with their lower levels of spleen virus 
(Fig. 1C). All tetramer-positive cells expressed the activation 
marker CD43+ (Fig. 4) and the vast majority were also positive 
for CD69 (data not shown). These results confirmed the pres-
ence of a significant population of recently activated FV-specific CD8+
T cells in persistently infected mice and made it possible to com-
pare functional properties of CD8+ T cells with an effector phe-
notype during acute and persistent FV infection.

Impaired cytotoxicity in persistently infected mice. Previous 
results showed that CD8+ T cells from persistently infected 
mice were poorly cytotoxic in vitro compared to CD8+ T cells 
from acutely infected mice (41) (data not shown). To confirm 
that these results reflected the physiological situation, an in 
vivo cytotoxic T-lymphocyte assay was performed by injecting
```