```plaintext
PLOS PATHOGENS                                                                                      Generate exhausted CD8+ T cells in vitro

exhausted HIV-specific CD8+ T cells by upregulating Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL [7, 53]. Its inclusion in 
the repeat peptide stimulations, we argue, promotes the survival of these cells as they become 
gradually more exhausted while avoiding the increased apoptosis mediated by IL-2, a known 
promotor of T cell AICD [54].

The in vitro exhausted CTL we generate have many of the molecular features of exhaustion. 
In particular transcription factors that associate and orchestrate T cell exhaustion are clearly 
modulated in the same manner as seen with in vivo induced CTL exhaustion of chronic infec-
tion models like LCMV clone 13 infections and cancer [11, 31]. The transcription factor TOX 
is known to be increased in in vivo exhausted CTL [23, 24, 26], while TCF-1 is downregulated 
in exhausted cells and its presence is associated with precursor exhausted CTL that retain 
some proliferative capacity [11, 40]. All in vitro exhausted CTL we generate have high protein 
expression for TOX and Tox mRNA is upregulated by 2.6-fold. Furthermore, in vitro 
exhausted CTL have downregulated TCF-1 and at the mRNA levels their Tcf7 is decreased 
by 6.6-fold. A recent report indicated that Prdm1 and c-maf transcription factors control a co-
inhibitory module in T cells [55]. Although we found that Prdm1 expression was upregulated 
by 4.5-fold in our in vitro exhausted CTL, we did not find any changes in c-maf transcription 
factor. Activated protein C receptor (PROCR) and podoplanin (PDPN), recently reported to 
be co-inhibitory receptors [55], were not upregulated in our in vitro exhausted cells. This may 
not be surprising as these markers were only found in tumor infiltrating T cells and IL-27 may 
be mediating this profile [55]. Exhausted T cells from chronic infection however are not 
affected by IL-27 signaling [56] and thus PROCR and PDPN expression may depend on the 
tumor microenvironment and not characterize all exhausted CTL. Our in vitro exhaustion 
method generates exhausted T cells which may more closely reflect the core features of exhaus-
tion. Our method is independent of cytokine and antigenic stress that may occur in the in vivo 
of chronic infection or tumor microenvironment. Such factors can obscure direct exhaus-
related transcriptional changes from those induced by bystander effects such as high viral 
loads.

Our in vitro exhaustion method utilizes peptide-stimulated purified CD8+ T cells and 
therefore one could question whether TCR stimulation in the absence of co-stimulation induces 
anergy in our T cells. Although, T cell anergy and exhaustion may share some traits and poten-
tial signaling pathways of unresponsiveness to restimulation, the mechanisms of their induc-
tions is very different. Analyzing gene expression and signaling pathways we found no evidence 
for anergy in our in vitro exhausted CTL. Similar data were obtained with in vivo exhausted 
CTL. The reason we do not induce anergy in our cultures is because they are carried out in the 
presence of IL-7 and IL-15. It is well established that γc chain cytokines such as IL-2 and possi-
bly IL-7 and IL-15 can override the induction of anergy when CD8+ T cells are stimulated in 
the absence of CD28 costimulation [47, 49–51]. Cells were exhausted even when cultured with 
IL-2, albeit IL-2 in these cultures increases cell death significantly. Interestingly, our in vitro 
exhausted CTL express high levels of mRNA and surface CD80 and this may also contribute to 
preventing anergy. This is not surprising as activated mouse T cells can express CD80 both in in 
vitro but also in vivo in autoimmune mice [57, 58]. Thus in vitro exhausted CTL do not present 
key anergy traits although one cannot exclude that some downstream signaling or inhibitory 
pathways are shared between exhaustion and anergy.

Previous studies have reported that there are subsets of exhausted CTLs, one known as 
“progenitor exhausted” cells which express TCF1 and TOX, corresponding to cells that retain 
the capacity to expand with checkpoint blockade therapy and the other subpopulation known 
as the “terminally exhausted” cells which are TCF1 low and cannot respond to checkpoint 
blockade [26, 40, 41, 59]. In our in vitro exhausted cell cultures, we observed both subsets; a 
subset of cells that express low levels of TCF1 and high levels of TOX and GzmB, which is in 

PLOS Pathogens | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1008555 June 24, 2020                                                      16 / 27
```