```plaintext
PLOS PATHOGENS                                                                                      Generate exhausted CD8+ T cells in vitro

    To further confirm that DNA promoter methylation contributes to the downregulation of 
TCF1 expression in exhausted cells we treated cells with a DNMT inhibitor for the last 3 days 
of culture and examined whether TCF1 expression was modified in the repeat peptide stimula-
tion cultures. Indeed, treatment of these cells with DNMT inhibitor resulted in an increase in 
TCF1 levels in exhausted CTL (Fig 8C). This further supports that DNA methylation plays a 
role in silencing TCF1 as exhausted cells progress from “progenitor exhausted” to the “termi-
nally exhausted” subpopulation.
    DNMT inhibitor also reduced the expression of PD-1 and Tim3 in repeat peptide stimu-
lated cells (S4 Fig). Because PD-1 and Tim3 expression are controlled by promoter region 
DNA methylation [43, 45], our findings suggest that DNMT inhibitor prevented exhaustion 
rather than reverted the exhaustion of T cells. These experiments suggest that the in vitro 
exhaustion system we describe can be used to test reagents that modulate T cell exhaustion.

Anergy is not a feature of in vitro and in vivo exhausted CTL

The high purity of T cells in our culture system raises the question whether the absence of 
CD28 costimulation induces anergy [46–48] and this explains some of the phenotypes we 
observe. However, this is unlikely as our cells are cultured in the presence of IL-7 that has been 
suggested to prevent anergy [49] and furthermore we still see exhaustion when cells are cul-
tured with IL-2 (S5A and S5B Fig) another anergy preventing cytokine [50, 51]. Some CD28 
costimulation, however, may be present in our culture system, as repeat peptide stimulated 
cells express CD80 mRNA levels 74-fold and 13-fold higher compared to unstimulated and 
single peptide stimulated cultures, respectively. Flow cytometry confirmed the high surface 
expression of CD80 on repeat peptide stimulated cells (S5C Fig).
    To further exclude that our repeat peptide stimulated cells have features of anergy, we per-
formed GSEA for sets of genes identified by in vitro anergy induction (gene set GSE5960) [46]. 
We find that both genes that are upregulated and downregulated in anergic T cells, are 
enriched in our repeat peptide stimulated cells (S6A and S6B Fig). Thus there is no evidence 
for the presence of anergy. We found a similar enrichment for genes both upregulated and 
downregulated in anergic T cells in in vivo exhausted gp33-specific CTL from LCMV clone 13 
infected mice (gene set GSE41867) [12] (S6C and S6D Fig).
    Finally, we performed pathway enrichment analysis by IPA on the genes differentially 
expressed between repeat peptide stimulated cells and the unstimulated cells. We found that 
anergy related signaling pathway was neither up- or down-regulated in the repeat peptide 
stimulated cells (S6E Fig). In this comparison, the T cell exhaustion signaling pathway was 
again the most significant upregulated pathway. Taken together, these findings argue that 
anergy is not a major feature of our in vitro exhausted CTL.

Discussion

Persistent antigen stimulation is a key driver of T cell exhaustion [37, 38]. In this study, we 
show that repeat stimulation with peptide is sufficient to induce T cell exhaustion in vitro. 
Repeat peptide stimulation rapidly, within 5 days, induced all characteristics of CTL exhaus-
tion including loss of cytokine production and polyfunctionality, the expression of multiple 
inhibitory receptors, reduced expansion capacity and competitive fitness, transcription factor 
and gene expression patterns all compatible with in vivo generated exhausted CTL [10, 11]. 
This phenotype was largely preserved when cells were rested for several days. Our in vitro 
repeat peptide stimulation culture conditions include cytokines IL-7 and IL-15 which are 
known to have anti-apoptotic potential and ensure T cells do not undergo activation induced 
cell death (AICD) [52]. In particular, IL-15 has been shown to promote the survival of 

PLOS Pathogens | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1008555 June 24, 2020                                                                 15 / 27
```