```plaintext
PLOS PATHOGENS                                                                                      Generate exhausted CD8+ T cells in vitro

line with the characteristics of “terminally exhausted” T cells and a subset that is TCF1+TOX+ 
+ corresponding to the “progenitor exhausted” cells. All cells are T-bet+PD1+, thus our TOX 
+ cells may retain some “progenitor exhausted” characteristics as T-bet+ cells are reported to 
retain proliferative capacity in the exhaustion setting [42]. Thus, these two subsets exist in our 
exhausted cultures and this allows us to perform future in depth characterization of these cells 
and establish their relationship and the factors that control them. CXCR5+ T cells are typically 
described as “less exhausted” and responders to check-point blockade in chronic viral infec-
tion [21, 59]. Although “progenitor exhausted” TCF1+TOX+ are present in our repeat peptide 
stimulated T cells, we could not detect any CXCR5 expression. CXCR5+ exhausted CD8+ T 
cells are found in lymphoid organs but not in peripheral blood or other infected organs of 
LCMVclone13 infected animals [21], and therefore our CXCR5- in vitro exhausted cells may 
resemble more the later than those found in lymphoid organs.

TCF1 downregulation in exhausted cells was reported to be accompanied by reduced chro-
matin accessibility [24, 25]. Our findings suggest that DNA methylation also contributes to 
reduced TCF1 expression as both the Tcf7 promoter was found to be hyper-methylated and 
the inhibition of DNA methyltransferases during the last 3 days of culture results in the reten-
tion of TCF1 expression in our exhausted CTL. Whether these TCF1 high cells generated by 
DNMT inhibitor treatment retain all the characteristics of the “progenitor exhausted” cell sub-
set remains to be determined. If true it may indicate that such inhibitors can be combined with 
checkpoint inhibition therapy as such TCF1+ cells are the major responders to therapy.

By studying these in vitro exhausted CTLs, the accumulation of inhibitory receptor expres-
sion on exhausted cells can be better understood. PD-1, Tim-3 and TIGIT are rapidly 
expressed on the early exhausted cells, while the other receptors, like CD160 and CD244, were 
induced more slowly by repeat antigen stimulation and are not upregulated in response to 
checkpoint blockade therapy, such as anti-PD1/PD-L1, on the treatment of human cancer 
[60], there is considerable interest to revive the function of exhausted T cells by co-blockade of 
multiple inhibitory receptors simultaneously. Our in vitro method, which induces multiple 
inhibitory receptors in just a few days, can serve as a feasible tool to test blocking approaches 
before performing in vivo animal experiments. For example, TIGIT blockade can be tested, 
because these cells not only upregulated TIGIT, but also downregulated its competitor of the 
same ligand, CD266, on their surface. Moreover, the underlying mechanisms of checkpoint 
blockade on reversal of T cell exhaustion need to be further investigated as do the pathways 
that restrain these cells from developing into terminally exhausted cells. Clearly the balance of 
these exhausted cells can be modulated with large effects on the numbers and potentially the 
function of these cells. As we recently have demonstrated, by overexpressing a single miRNA, 
namely miR-155, we can ameliorate the attrition of virus-specific CTL during chronic infec-
tion and in vivo increase their numbers by 2 logs [61]. Our in vitro system of T cell exhaustion 
can be used to screen the overexpression of genes with retroviruses or their inhibition or dele-
tion using CRISPR-Cas9 to discover new targets which modulate T cell exhaustion.

The method we describe allows for the rapid, within 5 days, generation of large numbers of 
fully exhausted CTL and can therefore be used for medium to high throughput screening of 
compounds, reagents or gene modifications that can prevent, ameliorate, reverse or accelerate 
T cell exhaustion. In particular, the extreme loss of IL-2 and TNFα production in our repeat 
peptide stimulated cells allows for the first time a truly medium to high throughput approach 
for drug screening since changes in IL-2 or TNFα production can be easily determined in the 
supernatants.

In conclusion, we have established a rapid in vitro system of CD8+ T cell exhaustion. These 
exhausted CTL exhibit all the known molecular and functional characteristics of exhaustion 
yet can be induced in large numbers within 5 days as opposed to the small numbers generated

PLOS Pathogens | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1008555 June 24, 2020                                                                 17 / 27
```