```plaintext
PLOS PATHOGENS

Generate exhausted CD8+ T cells in vitro

Fig 1. Scheme of the experimental protocol and numbers of live exhausted CTL generated by in vitro exhaustion. (A) Scheme of the experimental set up.
(B) Purified CD8+ T cells (0.5x106 cells per well) were cultured either unstimulated, stimulated once with peptide and repeat peptide stimulated. Live cells
were counted on day 5. Pooled data showing absolute cell numbers (left) and fold expansion (right). Data are from n = 13 and 10 independent experiments.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1008555.g001

cells could barely be detected in the repeat peptide stimulated cells after re-stimulation, while
IL-2 was readily produced by single peptide stimulated cells (37±3%) and unstimulated cells
(60±4%) (Fig 2A and 2B). Ultimately, these results demonstrate that repeat peptide stimulation
of CD8+ T cells in vitro leads to impaired cytokine production in a manner that has been pre-
viously reported in exhausted CD8+ T cells, first IL-2 production is lost followed by TNF-α
and finally IFN-γ.

Exhausted CD8+ T cells, unlike memory cells, cannot produce multiple cytokines at the
same time, and we therefore assessed the polyfunctionality of our in vitro generated cells. For
this, the percentage of single, double and triple cytokine producing cells were determined and
visualized using the SPICE software. In unstimulated cultured cells, 33% produced all three
cytokines simultaneously upon peptide stimulation while significant percentages of these cells
were double producer (Fig 2C). Only 15% of the cells did not produce any of these three cyto-
kines. Similarly, in the single peptide stimulated cells, 18% were triple positive for all three
cytokines, large numbers were double cytokine producers, while 26% were incapable of releas-
ing any of these cytokines (Fig 2C). In contrast, 70% of the repeat peptide stimulated cells
could not produce any cytokines after re-stimulation. IFN-γ single producers were 25% of the
cells, while very few cells produced other cytokines (Fig 2C). To demonstrate the persistence of
the cytokine profile of repeat peptide stimulated cells, we rested cells without peptide for
another 3 days before examining their cytokine production. We found that the reduced cyto-
kine production of repeat peptide stimulated cells was retained.

Degranulation is an important step for the CD8+ T cell cytotoxicity. We therefore analyzed
the degranulation marker CD107a and Granzyme B (GzmB) expression in our cells. When
cells were analyzed without peptide re-stimulation, cells either unstimulated or single peptide
stimulated were negative for CD107a and GzmB (Fig 3A and 3B), while repeat peptide stimu-
lated cells showed a significantly higher level of both markers (Fig 3A and 3B). When cells
were re-stimulated with OVA257–264 peptide, cells cultivated in the presence of no peptide
and single peptide stimulated cells upregulated CD107a (Fig 3A). In contrast, repeat peptide
stimulated cells failed to increase CD107a expression after re-stimulation, indicating that these
cells are not able to degranulate further upon re-stimulation. Granzyme B was increased in
repeat peptide stimulated cells in agreement with the terminal differentiation of exhausted
cells (Fig 3B). No increase of GzmB was detected after 6 hours of re-stimulation for any of the
conditions analyzed (Fig 3B). Repeat peptide stimulated cells exhibited reduced cytotoxic
capacity against OVA(257–264) peptide-loaded tumor cells (Fig 3C). These findings clearly show
that after repeat stimulation in vitro, CTL lose their ability to make cytokines, have reduced
polyfunctionality, cannot degranulate further, have increased GzmB and reduced cytotoxicity.
All of these features are characteristics of the dysfunctional state of in vivo exhausted CTL.

Multiple inhibitory receptors were upregulated following repeat peptide
stimulation

An increase in inhibitory receptor expression corresponds to a more exhaustive state [17]. After
harvesting on day five, the cells were stained immediately for the surface expression of the inhibi-
tory receptors PD-1 (CD279), CD244, CD160, Lag3 (CD223), Tim-3 (CD366) and TIGIT. As
expected, inhibitory receptors were barely expressed on the cells without peptide stimulation and
single peptide stimulated cells (Fig 4A and 4B), except for PD-1, where 20±4% of the single

PLOS Pathogens | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1008555 June 24, 2020 5 / 27
```