```plaintext
PLOS PATHOGENS                                                                                      Generate exhausted CD8+ T cells in vitro

Fig 7. Repeat peptide stimulated cells have distinct transcriptional profile. RNAseq analysis was performed on live CD8+ T cells sorted from 5 
day culture of OT-I CD8+ T cells. Cells were either without peptide (no peptide), one-time stimulation (single peptide) or daily peptide 
stimulations (repeat peptide). (A) PCA plot of RNA-seq data show that cells from identical culture conditions cluster together and away from each 
other. (B) Heatmap shown for the top 50 differentially expressed genes within CTL from the different culture conditions. (C) Heatmaps for the 
individual genes clustered based on function presented. (D) Repeat peptide stimulated CTL transcriptomes were enriched in the signatures of 
LCMV-Cl13 exhausted CTL. Differentially expressed genes in repeat peptide stimulated CTL were analyzed by GSEA for their enrichment in gene 
sets found in exhausted CTL from LCMV-Cl13 infected mice. Enrichment in upregulated (left) and downregulated (right) genes shown. (E) 
Ingenuity pathway analysis was performed on the differentially expressed genes in repeat peptide stimulated cells (compared to single peptide). 
Significantly upregulated pathways (orange) and downregulated pathways (blue) in repeat peptide stimulated cells are depicted. P values 
(hypergeometric test) are presented as -log10.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1008555.g007

performed gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA). Differentially expressed genes between repeat 
peptide stimulated cell and single peptide stimulated cells were compared to public gene sets 
of upregulated or downregulated in in vivo exhausted CTLs (gene set GSE84766). Gene sets 
upregulated in exhaustion were found to be significantly more enriched in the repeat peptide 
stimulated upregulated genes compared to single peptide stimulated cells (Fig 7D). Conversely, 
the gene sets that were reported to be downregulated in exhausted cells were more enriched in 
the genes that were downregulated in repeat peptide stimulated cells versus the single peptide 
stimulated cells (Fig 7D). Thus, GSEA demonstrated significant transcriptional similarity 
between in vitro repeat peptide stimulated cells and in vivo exhausted cells. To further investi- 
gate signaling pathways that distinguish repeat peptide stimulated cells from single peptide 
stimulated cells, we performed IPA analysis. The most significant pathway with upregulated 
activity in repeat peptide stimulated cells was the T cell exhaustion signaling pathway (Fig 7E). 
These findings clearly show that in vitro repeat peptide stimulation results in the transcrip- 
tional changes of in vivo exhausted CD8+ T cells from LCMV cl 13 infections which serve as 
the benchmark of CTL exhaustion.

Repeat peptide stimulation results in hyper-methylation of the Tcf7 
transcriptional regulatory region

Changes in methylation of transcription regulatory region have been described in exhausted 
CTLs [18, 43]. In order to identify whether in vitro repeat peptide stimulated cells also possess 
similar epigenetic characteristics of exhausted CTLs, whole genome methylated DNA sequenc- 
ing (MeD-seq) [44] was performed on the sorted live CD8+ T cells. Stimulated T cells undergo 
distinct genome wide DNA methylation changes depending on the type of treatment (Fig 8A 
and S2 Table). In comparison to unstimulated and single peptide stimulated cells, the tran- 
scriptional regulatory region of Pdcd1 had significantly less DNA methylation in the repeat 
peptide stimulated cells (Fig 8B, left). When comparing the promoter methylation status (2kb 
region surrounding the TSS) of Tcf7, there was more DNA methylation detected in repeat pep- 
tide stimulated than in the single peptide stimulated cells or unstimulated cells (Fig 8B, center). 
Meanwhile, in the promoter region of the GzmB, significantly less DNA methylation was 
found in the repeat peptide stimulated cells than in the other cells (Fig 8B, right), which was in 
line with the higher expression of the protein upregulated in the repeat peptide stimulated cells 
(Fig 3B). Besides Pdcd1, none of the other inhibitory receptor genes’ regulatory or promoter 
regions were found to possess significant differences in methylation status, although some of 
them showed expected trends in DNA methylation changes at their TSS. Interestingly, 
DNA methylation states of the cytokine genes IL-2, IFN-γ and TNF-α were not significantly 
different. This indicated that other gene expression control mechanisms, like histone modifi- 
cations or transcription factor abundance, might regulate the differential expression of these 

PLOS Pathogens | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1008555 June 24, 2020                                                                 13 / 27
```